The labor market strengthened further last  year but at a slower pace than in 2018 . . .  Payroll employment gains were solid in the second half of 2019 and averaged 176,000 per month during the year as a whole. This  pace is somewhat slower than the average monthly gains in 2018, even accounting for the anticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ upcoming benchmark revision to payroll employment. However, the pace of job gains appears to have remained faster than what is needed to provide jobs for net new entrants to the labor force as the population grows. Reflecting the employment gains over this period, the unemployment rate declined further in 2019 and stood at 3.5 percent in December, 0.4 percentage point below its year earlier level and at its lowest level since 1969. In addition, the unemployment rate is 0.6 percentage point below the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Strengthening labor market conditions are also evident in rising labor force participation rates (LFPRs)—that is, the shares of the population either working or actively seeking work. The LFPR for individuals aged 16 and over was 63.2 percent in December, above its level a year ago despite the downward pressure of about ¼ percentage point per year associated with the aging of the population. The LFPR for prime-age individuals (between 25 and 54 years old), which is much less sensitive to the effects of population aging, has been rising over the past few years and continued to increase in 2019. The employment to-population ratio for individuals aged 16 and over—that is, the share of people who are working—was 61.0 percent in December and has been increasing since 2011. Other indicators are also consistent with strong labor market conditions, albeit with some slowing in the pace of improvement since 2018. As reported in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), job openings have remained plentiful, although the private-sector job openings rate has come down over the past year. Similarly, the quits rate in the JOLTS has remained near the top of its historical range, an indication that workers are being bid away  from their current jobs or have become more confident that they can successfully switch jobs if they so wish. These data accord well with surveys of consumers that indicate households perceive jobs as plentiful. The JOLTS layoff rate and the number of people filing initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits— historically, a good early indicator of economic downturns—have both remained quite low.  . . . and unemployment rates have fallen, on net, for all major demographic groups over the past several years  Differences in unemployment rates across ethnic and racial groups have narrowed in recent years, on net, as they typically do during economic expansions, after having widened during the 2007–09 recession.  The decline in the unemployment rate for African Americans has been particularly sizable, and its average rate in the second half of October 2019 was the lowest recorded since the data began in 1972. Although the unemployment rates for African Americans  and for Hispanics remain substantially  above those for whites and for Asians, those  differentials in the second half of 2019 were  at their narrowest levels on record. The rise in  LFPRs for prime-age individuals over the past  few years has also been apparent in each of  these racial and ethnic groups.   Increases in labor compensation have  remained moderate by historical  standards . . .  Despite strong labor market conditions, the  available indicators generally suggest that  increases in hourly labor compensation have  remained moderate, averaging about 3 percent  over the past two years. These indicators  include the employment cost index, a measure  of both wages and the cost to employers of  providing benefits; compensation per hour in  the business sector, a broad-based but volatile  measure of wages, salaries, and benefits; and  average hourly earnings from the payroll  survey, a monthly index that is timely but  does not account for benefits. The  median 12-month wage growth of individuals  reporting to the Current Population Survey  calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank  of Atlanta, which tends to be higher than  broader-based measures of wage growth,  remains near the upper portion of its range  over the past couple of years. Interestingly,  wage growth over the past few years has been  strongest for workers in relatively low-paying  jobs, suggesting that the strong labor market  is having a more pronounced benefit for  these workers.  . . . and likely have been restrained by  slow growth in labor productivity over  much of the expansion  These moderate rates of hourly compensation  gains likely reflect the offsetting influences of  a strengthening labor market and productivity  growth that has been weak through much  of the expansion. From 2008 to 2018, labor  productivity increased a little more than  1 percent per year, on average, well below  the average pace from 1996 to 2007 of nearly  3 percent and also below the average gain  in the 1974–95 period. Although  considerable debate remains about the  reasons for the slowdown in productivity  growth over this period, the weakness may be  partly attributable to the sharp pullback in  capital investment, including on research and  development, during the most recent recession  and the relatively slow recovery that followed.  More recently, labor productivity is estimated  to have increased 1.5 percent over the four  quarters ending in 2019:Q3—a small  improvement from the preceding year,  especially given the volatility of the  productivity data, but still moderate relative to  earlier periods. While it is uncertain whether  productivity growth will continue to improve,  a sustained pickup in productivity growth, as  well as additional labor market strengthening,  would support stronger gains in labor  compensation.  Inflation was below 2 percent last year  After having been close to the FOMC’s  objective of 2 percent in 2018, inflation moved  back below 2 percent last year, where it has  been for most of the time since the end of the  most recent recession. The 12-month change  in the price index for personal consumption  expenditures (PCE) was 1.6 percent in  December 2019, as was the 12-month  measure of inflation that excludes food and  energy items (so-called core inflation), which  historically has been a better indicator of  where inflation will be in the future than the  overall index. Both measures are  down from the rates recorded a year ago;  the slowing partly results from particularly  low readings in the monthly price data in the  first quarter of 2019, which appear to reflect  idiosyncratic price declines in a number of  specific categories such as apparel, used cars,  banking services, and portfolio management  services. Indeed, core inflation picked up after  the first quarter and was at an average annual  rate of 1.9 percent over the remainder of  the year. The trimmed mean PCE price index,  calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of  Dallas, also suggests a transitory element to  inflation readings early last year. The trimmed  mean provides an alternative way to purge  inflation of transitory influences, and it is less  sensitive than the core index to idiosyncratic  price movements such as those noted earlier.5  The 12-month change in this measure was  about the same in December 2019 as it was  in 2018.  Oil prices fluctuated in 2019  After falling from more than $80 per barrel to  less than $60 per barrel in late 2018, the Brent  spot price of crude oil fluctuated between $60  and $70 for most of 2019. Prices generally  moved up in the second half of last year,  supported by expectations of supply cuts  in OPEC member countries and, later on,  diminished concerns about the global outlook. Prices also spiked briefly in early  January over tensions with Iran. In recent  weeks, however, oil prices moved lower amid  heightened fears that the coronavirus outbreak  that started in China might weigh on economic  growth and the demand for oil. Despite  these fluctuations in oil prices, retail gasoline  prices generally edged lower since mid-2019.  For 2019 as a whole, consumer energy prices  rose modestly more than the core index.  Meanwhile, food prices posted only a small  increase in 2019, held down by soft prices for  farm commodities, and contributed very little  to overall consumer price inflation.  Reported prices of imports other than  energy fell  Nonfuel import prices, before accounting for  the effects of tariffs on the price of imported  goods, have continued to decline from their  mid-2018 peak, responding to lower foreign  inflation and declines in non-oil commodity  prices. After declining in the  first half of 2019, prices of industrial metals  appear to have bottomed out in recent  months, consistent with increased optimism  about global demand following positive trade  developments.  Survey-based measures of inflation  expectations have been broadly stable . . .  Expectations of inflation likely influence actual  inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting  decisions. Survey-based measures of inflation  expectations at medium- and longer-term  horizons have remained broadly stable over  the past year. In the Survey of Professional  Forecasters, conducted by the Federal  Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median  expectation for the annual rate of increase in  the PCE price index over the next 10 years  has been very close to 2 percent for the past  several years. In the University of  Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median  value for inflation expectations over the next  5 to 10 years has fluctuated within a narrow  range around 2½ percent since the end of  2016, though this level is between ¼ and  ½ percentage point lower than had prevailed  through 2014. In the Survey of Consumer  Expectations, conducted by the Federal  Reserve Bank of New York, the median of  respondents’ expected inflation rate three  years hence moved lower, on net, in the second  half of last year and averaged 2.5 percent,  ¼ percentage point below its average over the  preceding three years.  . . . and market-based measures of  inflation compensation have also been  little changed  Inflation expectations can also be gauged  by market-based measures of inflation  compensation. However, the inference  is not straightforward, because market based measures can be importantly affected  by changes in premiums that provide  compensation for bearing inflation and  liquidity risks. Measures of longer-term  inflation compensation—derived either from  differences between yields on nominal Treasury  securities and those on comparable-maturity  Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS)  or from inflation swaps—have been little  changed, on net, since the middle of 2019,  with both measures below their respective  ranges that persisted for most of the 10 years  before the start of notable declines in mid-2014. The TIPS-based measure of 5-to-  10-year-forward inflation compensation and  the analogous measure from inflation swaps  are now about 1¾ percent and 2 percent,  respectively.8  Growth of gross domestic product was  moderate in the second half of 2019 . . .  Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported  to have increased at a moderate average  annual rate of 2.1 percent in the second half  of 2019, although growth was somewhat  slower than in the first half of the year and in  2018. Consumer spending rose at  a moderate pace, on average, and residential  investment turned up after having declined  since the end of 2017. In contrast, business  fixed investment declined in the second half  of last year, reflecting a number of factors  that likely include uncertainty regarding  trade tensions and the weak global growth  outlook. Those factors also continued to weigh  on manufacturing output, which declined  over the first half of 2019 and has moved  roughly sideways since then. (See the box  “Manufacturing and U.S. Business Cycles.”)  Despite those headwinds, the economic  expansion continues to be supported by steady  job gains, increases in household wealth,  expansionary fiscal policy, and supportive  domestic financial conditions that include  moderate borrowing costs and easy access to  credit for many households and businesses.  . . . and downside risks to the outlook  receded somewhat  Downside risks to the economic outlook  seem to have receded somewhat in the latter  part of 2019. Labor market conditions and  economic growth in the United States have  been resilient to the global headwinds in 2019,  and conflicts over trade policy diminished  somewhat toward the end of the year.  Economic growth abroad also shows signs of  stabilizing, though the coronavirus outbreak  presents a more recent risk. Reflecting these  factors as well as more accommodative  monetary policy stances in the United  States and some foreign economies, financial  conditions eased somewhat over the second  half of the year. Statistical models designed  to gauge the probability of recession using  various indicators, including the Treasury  yield curve, suggest that the likelihood of a  recession occurring over the next year has  fallen noticeably in recent months. Similarly,  as shown in Part 3, when Federal Reserve  policymakers most recently presented their  economic projections, in December, fewer  participants judged the risks to the outlook to  be tilted to the downside compared with their  projections from last June.  Ongoing improvements in the labor  market continue to support household  income and consumer spending  Consumer spending rose at a moderate pace,  on average, in the third and fourth quarters  of 2019 and posted another solid gain for the  year as a whole. The growth in real  PCE in recent years reflects the continued  Historically, the manufacturing sector in the United  States has been a source of economic strength and of  good jobs for workers at all levels of education. It is  also a highly cyclical sector that has tended to retrench  dramatically during economy-wide contractions and to  rebound sharply during expansions.  Concerns by some observers about a possible  economy-wide recession were prompted by declines  in the industrial production index for manufacturing  (IP) in the first two quarters of 2019, particularly when  viewed in conjunction with the stagnant manufacturing  growth that was occurring in many foreign economies.  Manufacturing output in the United States remained  weak through the end of the year. And, for  2019 as a whole, production decreased 1.3 percent,  with fairly broad-based declines across both durable  and nondurable goods industries. The slump in  manufacturing last year is attributable to several  factors, including trade developments, weak global  growth, softer business investment, lower oil prices  engendering a cutback in demand by drillers, and the  slower production of Boeing’s 737 Max aircraft due to  safety issues.  When considering the implications of these declines  in manufacturing production for the broader economy,  it is important to recognize that this weakness has likely  spilled over to other sectors. Manufacturing production  requires inputs from other industries, and goods  that are produced need to be transported and sold.  For example, a reduction in auto assemblies affects  automakers’ demand both for intermediate inputs like  steel and for business services like accounting. In turn,  the steelmakers need less iron ore, and the accountants  need less tech support. The input-output tables for the  U.S. economy imply that every dollar of factory output  requires 56 cents of input from other domestic sectors.  Manufacturing currently accounts for 12 percent of  gross domestic product (GDP), so its 2019 decline  of 1.3 percent would have directly subtracted about  0.15 percent from GDP; including inputs purchased  from upstream sectors, the drag is a bit more  than 0.2 percent. After adding in the downstream  activities needed to bring products to market (such as  transportation, wholesaling, and retailing), last year’s  decline in manufacturing likely reduced GDP by less  than 0.5 percent—not enough to tip an otherwise expanding economy into recession.  That modest effect partly reflects the decline in  manufacturing’s share of the U.S. economy since the  middle of the 20th century. Manufacturing employment  has dropped from about 30 percent of total employment  to less than 9 percent today, and the value added from  manufacturing has fallen from more than 25 percent  of GDP to a bit under 12 percent. However,  although the manufacturing sector has shrunk, factory  output may still be a good barometer of aggregate  demand and of the economy’s health.  Growth in the U.S. manufacturing sector has slowed  considerably over time. Measured from business  cycle peak to business cycle peak, output grew about  3.5 percent per year between 1920 and 1960, as well  as from 1960 through 2001. As seen in figure C, factory  production has moved up only about 0.5 percent per  year since 2001, and only 2 of those 19 calendar years  recorded gains of more than 3.5 percent.  To interpret the recent weakness in manufacturing  in this light, figure D shows 12-month changes in  “detrended” IP, where values below zero indicate  year-over-year changes in IP that are slower than its  trend at the time. Notably, most expansions include  periods of modest below-trend growth. In 2019, growth  averaged about 2 percentage points below trend, a  slowdown fairly similar to that in the 2015–16 period.  Other episodes of modest below-trend growth appear  in the expansions of the early 2000s, the 1990s, the  mid-1980s, and the 1960s. In contrast, as shown by the  red line in figure D, every recession since 1960—but  no expansion—includes at least some months when the  12-month change in IP was at least 7 percentage points  below trend. The available data, however, suggest that  the recent experience in the United States falls well  short of that threshold. improvements in the labor market, which  have supported further increases in household  income. Real disposable personal income, a  measure of households’ after-tax purchasing  power, increased 2.6 percent in 2019, a solid  gain albeit below the robust increase in 2018  that was bolstered by a reduction in personal  income taxes. The personal saving rate, at  7.7 percent in the fourth quarter, was little  changed from the previous year.  Spending was also supported by high  household wealth . . .  The relatively high level of aggregate  household net worth also supported consumer  spending last year. House prices, which are  of particular importance for the value of  assets held by a large portion of households,  continued to increase in 2019, although at  a more moderate pace than in recent years. In addition, U.S. equity prices,  which fell sharply at the end of 2018, have  rebounded since then. Equity wealth is more  concentrated among high-wealth households  with high propensities to save than is housing  wealth, however, and may therefore provide  less support for consumption. The ratio of  aggregate household net worth to household  income held steady through the third quarter  of last year at 6.9, near its all-time high.  . . . and consumer sentiment  remains strong  Consumers have remained upbeat during the  past year. The Michigan index of consumer  sentiment, which declined last summer as  trade tensions spiked, recovered in recent  months and currently stands at a high level by  historical standards. The sentiment measure  from the Conference Board, which has been  more stable, also suggests consumers are fairly  upbeat.  Borrowing conditions for households  remain generally favorable, and  borrowing costs have moved down since  the middle of 2019 . . .  Financing conditions for consumers remain  supportive of growth in household spending.  Interest rates on credit cards and auto loans  declined, on net, during the second half  of 2019, and consumer credit continued  to expand at a moderate pace.  Standards and delinquency rates for these  loans have been generally stable. For student  loans, credit remains widely available, with  over 90 percent of such credit being extended  by the federal government. After peaking in  2013, delinquencies on such loans have been  gradually declining, reflecting in part the  continued improvements in the labor market.  In the mortgage market, credit has continued  to be readily available for households with  solid credit profiles but remains noticeably  tighter than before the most recent recession  for borrowers with low credit scores.  . . . and activity in the housing sector  has picked up, likely reflecting lower  interest rates  Residential investment picked up in the second  half of 2019 after declining for six straight  quarters. Housing starts for single-family and  multifamily housing units increased sharply  in the second half of last year and posted  appreciable gains for the year as a whole, with  starts and permits for new construction rising  to the highest levels in more than 10 years. Sales of new and existing homes  also increased during 2019. This  improvement appears to have importantly  reflected the reduction in mortgage interest  rates; after increasing appreciably from mid-  2017 through 2018, rates declined markedly  last year, fully reversing those earlier increases. Despite the lower mortgage rates,  households’ perceptions of homebuying  conditions have remained low, likely reflecting  ongoing increases in housing prices. In contrast, business fixed investment  weakened in the second half of 2019 . . .  After increasing more than 5 percent per year  in 2017 and 2018, business fixed investment—  spending by businesses on structures,  equipment, and intangibles such as research  and development—stalled in 2019, as a  moderate gain in the first quarter was offset  by small declines over the rest of the year. The  softness in business investment last year was  evident in each of the three main components,  and a portion of the weakening appears to  reflect concerns over trade policy and slower  foreign growth; other factors included the  suspension of deliveries of the Boeing 737  Max aircraft and the continued decline in  drilling and mining structures investment  amid oil prices that fell back from the levels  reached in 2018. Forward-looking indicators  of business spending—such as orders of  capital goods, surveys of business conditions  and sentiment, and profit expectations from  industry analysts—all appear to have stabilized  in recent months but suggest that investment is  likely to remain subdued.  . . . despite corporate financing conditions  that remained accommodative overall  Financing conditions for nonfinancial  firms have remained accommodative amid  lower interest rates. Flows of credit to large  nonfinancial firms remained solid overall in  the third quarter of 2019. The  gross issuance of corporate bonds, although  lower than in the first half of last year, was  robust across credit categories. Yields on both  investment- and speculative-grade corporate  bonds continued to decrease and are near  historical lows. Spreads on corporate bond  yields over comparable-maturity Treasury  securities have continued to narrow, on net,  since the middle of last year and are at the  lower end of their historical distributions.  Respondents to the January Senior Loan  Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending  Practices, or SLOOS, reported that banks  eased several terms on commercial and  industrial (C&I) loans but that demand for  C&I loans has continued to weaken, consistent  with the slowdown in business investment.  C&I loan growth at banks has slowed since  the first half of last year, while commercial  real estate loan growth has continued to be  strong. Meanwhile, financing conditions for  small businesses have remained generally  accommodative, but credit growth has been  subdued.  Net exports added to GDP growth in  2019, as exports grew little but imports  declined  Real exports grew only a touch in 2019, as  tariffs on U.S. exports increased and foreign  growth weakened. Real imports  declined last year, in part reflecting higher  tariffs on imported goods and weakness in  investment and manufacturing. As a result,  real net exports—after having subtracted from  U.S. real GDP growth in 2018—provided a  modest boost to GDP growth in 2019. Relative  to 2018, the nominal trade deficit is slightly  less negative, and the current account deficit is  little changed as a percent of GDP.  Federal fiscal policy actions continued  to boost economic growth in 2019  while raising the federal unified budget  deficit . . .  The effects of fiscal policy actions enacted  at the federal level in earlier years continued  to boost GDP growth in 2019; the Tax Cuts  and Jobs Act of 2017 lowered personal  and business income taxes, and rising  appropriations consistent with the Bipartisan  Budget Act of 2018 boosted federal  purchases. In 2019, federal purchases rose  4.3 percent, well above the 2.7 percent increase  of 2018.  The federal unified budget deficit widened  further in fiscal year 2019 to 4½ percent of  nominal GDP from 3¾ percent of GDP in  2018, as expenditures moved up as a share of  the economy while receipts moved sideways. Expenditures, at 21 percent of  GDP, are above the level that prevailed in  the decade before the start of the 2007–09  recession, while receipts have continued to run  below their average levels. The ratio of federal  debt held by the public to nominal GDP rose  to 79 percent in fiscal 2019 and was quite  elevated relative to historical norms.  The Congressional Budget Office projects that  this ratio will rise further over the next several  years, reflecting large and rising deficits under  current fiscal policy.  . . . and the fiscal position of most state  and local governments is stable  The fiscal position of most state and local  governments remains stable, although  there is a range of experiences across these  governments. Revenues for these governments  have continued to grow in recent quarters, as  the economic expansion pushes up income  and sales tax collections for state governments,  and past house price gains continue to  push up property tax collections for local  governments. Boosted by a rebound in  construction spending following two years of  weak growth, real purchases by state and local  governments rose moderately last year but still  remained quite restrained, partly reflecting  budget pressures associated with pension and  retiree health-care obligations. State and local  government payrolls increased moderately in  2019 but have only roughly regained the peak  observed before the current expansion, and  real outlays for construction are more than  10 percent below their pre-recession peak.  The debt of these governments as a share of  the economy has continued to edge lower and  currently equals around 14 percent of GDP,  well below the previous peak of 21 percent  following the most recent recession. The expected path of the federal funds rate  over the next several years shifted down  Market-based measures of the expected  path of the federal funds rate over the next  several years have moved down, on net, since  the middle of last year and show about a  30 basis point decrease in the federal funds  rate over 2020 and a relatively flat path  thereafter. Survey-based measures  of the expected path of the policy rate also  shifted down from the levels observed in the  middle of 2019 but indicate no change to  the target range for the federal funds rate  over 2020 from its level at the end of 2019.  According to the results of the most recent  Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of  Market Participants, both conducted by  the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in  December, the median of respondents’ modal  projections implies a flat trajectory for the  target range of the federal funds rate for the  next few years. Additionally, market-based  measures of uncertainty about the policy  rate approximately one to two years ahead  declined, on balance, from their levels at the  end of last June and are close to their average  level in recent years.  U.S. nominal Treasury yields decreased  on net  After moving significantly lower over the first  half of 2019, nominal Treasury yields also  fell sharply in August, largely in response to  investors’ concerns regarding trade tensions  between the United States and China and the  global economic outlook. Later in  the year, as these concerns abated, Treasury  yields rose, the yield curve steepened, and  uncertainty about near-term Treasury yields—  measured by option-implied volatility on  short- and longer-dated swap rates—declined.  However, in the second half of January,  investors’ concerns about the implications of  the coronavirus outbreak for the economic  outlook weighed on Treasury yields and led  to a flattening of the yield curve as well as  some increase in uncertainty about near-term  Treasury yields. Since the middle of last year,  Treasury yields ended lower on net.  Consistent with changes in the yields on  nominal Treasury securities, yields on 30-year  agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an  important determinant of mortgage interest  rates—decreased, on balance, since the middle  of last year and remained low by historical  standards. Meanwhile, yields  on both investment- and speculative-grade  corporate bonds continued to decline and also  stayed low by historical standards.  Spreads on corporate bond yields over  comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed  moderately, on net, over the second half of  2019 and remained in the lower end of their  historical distribution.  Broad equity price indexes increased notably  Equity prices fluctuated in August and  September along with investors’ concerns  about trade developments and the economic  outlook. Later in 2019 and into 2020, as  these concerns abated, equity prices rose  substantially and were reportedly boosted  by greater certainty among investors that  monetary policy would remain accommodative  in the near term. Gains were spread  across most major economic sectors, with  the exception of the energy sector, for which  stock prices declined markedly. Measures of  implied and realized stock price volatility for  the S&P 500 index—the VIX and the 20-day  realized volatility—increased in August to  fairly elevated levels but declined later in the  year. (For a discussion of financial  stability issues, see the box “Developments  Related to Financial Stability.”) Markets for Treasury securities, mortgage backed securities, and municipal bonds  have functioned well  While available indicators of Treasury market  functioning have generally remained stable since  the first half of 2019—including bid-ask  spreads, bid sizes, and estimates of transaction  costs—some, such as measures of market  depth, have decreased. However, the decline in  measures of market depth has reportedly not led  to any concerns about Treasury market liquidity.  Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market  were also generally stable. Credit conditions in  municipal bond markets remained stable as well,  with yield spreads on 20-year general obligation  municipal bonds over comparable-maturity  Treasury securities declining notably and  standing near historically low levels.  Money market rates moved down in line  with decreases in the FOMC’s target  range, except for some notable volatility  in mid-September  Decreases in the FOMC’s target range for  the federal funds rate in July, September, and  October transmitted effectively through money  markets, with yields on a broad set of money  market instruments moving lower in response  to the FOMC’s policy actions.  The effective federal funds rate moved nearly in  parity with the interest rate paid on reserves  and was closely tracked by the overnight  Eurodollar rate. Other short-term interest  rates, including those on commercial paper and  negotiable certificates of deposit, also moved  down in line with decreases in the policy rate.  Domestic short-term funding markets were  volatile in mid-September—amid large flows  related to corporate tax payments and  settlement of Treasury securities—and  experienced significant tightening of conditions.  The effective federal funds rate rose above the  target range on September 17 but then moved  back within the target range following the  Federal Reserve’s open market operations,  which eased pressures in money markets.  Developments Related to Financial Stability The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board  for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system  focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas:  asset valuations, household and business debt, leverage  in the financial sector, and funding risks.  Asset prices have risen partly because of declines  in interest rates, but valuation pressures are elevated.  Equity prices increased nearly 30 percent over 2019,  and the forward price-to-earnings ratio has reached the  recent peak seen in 2018. In corporate debt  markets, the spreads of interest rates on newly issued  leveraged loans over LIBOR (London interbank offered  rate) have decreased since July 2019 across the credit quality spectrum, with spreads for the relatively higher rated issuers reaching their post-crisis lows. Spreads  on investment- and speculative-grade bonds over  comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed since  July 2019 and stand notably below their respective  medians. In commercial real estate markets,  prices continued to grow at a robust pace in recent  quarters, with capitalization rates at historically low  levels. Although house price growth slowed noticeably  in 2019, house prices still appear to lie modestly above  the level predicted by their historical relationship  with rents.  vulnerabilities associated with total private-sector  debt continue to be at a moderate level relative to their  historical norms. Total household debt has grown at  a slower pace than economic activity over the past  decade, in part reflecting that mortgage credit has  remained tight for borrowers with low credit scores,  undocumented income, or high debt-to-income ratios.  In contrast, business debt levels continue to be elevated  compared with either business assets or gross domestic  product, with the riskiest firms accounting for most of  the increase in debt in recent years. Although  the net issuance of riskier forms of business debt—  high-yield bonds and institutional leveraged loans—  has slowed since July 2019, it is still solid by historical  standards.  In addition, about half of investment-grade debt  outstanding is currently rated in the lowest category  of the investment-grade range (triple-B), a share that is  near an all-time high. The concentration of investment grade debt at the lower end of the investment-grade  spectrum creates the risk that adverse developments,  such as a deterioration in economic activity, could lead  to a sizable volume of bond downgrades to speculative grade ratings. Such conditions could trigger investors to  sell the downgraded bonds rapidly, increasing market  illiquidity and causing outsized downward price  pressures. Leverage in the financial sector appears low relative  to historical norms. The banking sector is much more  highly capitalized, in part due to the regulatory reforms  enacted after the financial crisis. In addition, the results  of the most recent stress test, released in June 2019,  indicated that these banks are well positioned to  continue lending to households and businesses even  in the event of a severe global recession. However,  several large banks have announced plans to distribute  capital to their shareholders in excess of expected  earnings, implying that capital at those banks will  decrease. Outside the banking sector, broker-dealers  as well as property-and-casualty insurance companies  continue to operate with historically low levels of  leverage. Leverage at life insurance companies has risen  but continues to be close to its average level over the  past two decades, and leverage at hedge funds remains  near the top of its range since 2014. Furthermore,  the outlook for profitability of a range of financial  institutions has weakened following declines in interest  rates. Weaker profitability could affect their ability to  absorb losses or build capital through retained earnings.  Funding risk in the banking sector remains low.  Banks rely only modestly on short-term wholesale  funding and maintain large amounts of high-quality  liquid assets in compliance with liquidity regulations  introduced after the financial crisis and the improved  understanding by banks of their liquidity risks. In  addition, money market mutual funds remain less prone  to runs than they were before the implementation of  the money market reforms, as the composition of assets  under management remains heavily tilted toward the  safer and more liquid government funds. Nonetheless,  the volatility in repurchase agreement (repo) markets  in mid-September 2019 highlighted the possibility for  frictions in repo markets to spill over to other markets.  Foreign financial, economic, and political  developments could pose a number of near-term risks  to the U.S. financial system. In China, fragilities in  the corporate and financial sector leave it vulnerable  to adverse developments. Because of the size of  the Chinese economy, significant distress in China  could spill over to U.S. and global markets through a  retrenchment of risk appetite, U.S. dollar appreciation,  and declines in trade and commodity prices.  In Europe, the risk of a “no-deal Brexit” passed  at the end of January, but the United Kingdom and  the European Union are still committed to conclude  negotiations over their future relationship—including  new trade arrangements—by the end of 2020. Failure  to do so could trigger market and economic disruptions  in Europe that may weaken systemically important  financial institutions and spill over to global markets,  leading to a tightening of U.S. financial conditions. Bank credit continued to expand, and  bank profitability remained robust  Aggregate credit provided by commercial  banks continued to expand through the second  half of 2019, as the strength in commercial real  estate and residential real estate loan growth,  helped by falling interest rates, more than  offset the slowdown in C&I and consumer  loans. In the second half of last year, the pace  of bank credit expansion was about in line  with that of nominal GDP, leaving the ratio  of total commercial bank credit to current dollar GDP little changed from its value last  June. Overall, measures of bank  profitability ticked down a bit in the third  quarter because of narrower net interest  margins but remain near their post-crisis highs.  International Developments  Growth in advanced foreign economies  weakened, but it appears to be stabilizing  Real GDP growth in several advanced  foreign economies (AFEs) appears to have  stepped down in the second half of the year. However, incoming data suggest  that the slowdown in the AFEs may have  bottomed out. Household spending has  generally remained resilient, sustained by  low unemployment rates and rising wages.  Financial conditions have improved further,  supported in part by accommodative monetary  policy actions. The protracted slump in global  manufacturing, which weighed on external  demand across the AFEs, is showing tentative  signs of nearing an end. In the euro area,  where manufacturing activity was particularly  weak, recent indicators suggest that growth  may be steadying. In Japan, real GDP appears  to have contracted sharply at the end of 2019,  following a consumption tax hike in October,  but its effects are likely to be transitory.  In the United Kingdom, Brexit-related  uncertainty weighed on economic activity  throughout 2019; around the turn of the year,  U.K. and European Union authorities took  the necessary steps to prevent a disorderly  Brexit from occurring on January 31, 2020,  but they still need to negotiate a new trade  arrangement.  Inflationary pressures remained subdued  in many advanced foreign economies  Against a backdrop of slower economic  growth, consumer prices in many AFEs  continued to rise at a subdued pace, especially  in the euro area and Japan. Canada  remains an exception, as inflation there  hovered around 2 percent.  Central banks in several advanced foreign  economies provided accommodation  In response to subdued growth and below target inflation, the European Central  Bank introduced a new stimulus package in  September of last year, including a deposit  rate cut of 10 basis points to negative  0.5 percent, a restart of its Asset Purchase  Programme, and more favorable terms for its  targeted longer-term refinancing operations.  Similarly, the Reserve Bank of Australia and  the Reserve Bank of New Zealand reduced  their policy rates in the second half of last  year, citing concerns about the global outlook.  The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England,  and the Bank of Japan kept their policy rates  unchanged, although communications by their  officials took a more dovish tone, emphasizing  increased downside risks to the global  economy. In contrast, Sweden’s Riksbank  and Norway’s Norges Bank increased their  policy rates, citing favorable macroeconomic  conditions and concerns about growing  financial imbalances.  Financial conditions in advanced foreign  economies eased further  Notwithstanding slowing global growth  and bouts of political tensions, financial  conditions in the AFEs, on balance, eased  further in the second half of 2019, supported  by accommodative central bank actions,  progress on trade negotiations between the  United States and China, and diminished fears  of a hard Brexit. Long-term interest rates in  many AFEs remained well below the levels  seen at the end of 2018. Equity  prices, as well as prices of other risky assets,  increased moderately. Sovereign  bond spreads over German bund yields for  euro-area peripheral countries narrowed  slightly. In recent weeks, however, equity and  bond markets gave up some of their gains as  uncertainty about the economic effects of the  coronavirus weighed on investors’ sentiment.  Growth slowed markedly in many  emerging market economies, but there  are tentative signs of stabilization  Chinese GDP growth slowed further in the  second half of 2019 against the backdrop of  increased tariffs on Chinese exports, global  weakness in trade and manufacturing, and  authorities’ deleveraging campaign that  continued to exert a drag on the economy. However, recent data suggest that  China’s economic activity picked up at the  end of last year, in part supported by some  fiscal and monetary policy stimulus and  some easing of trade tensions. In emerging  Asia excluding China, economic growth  was dragged down by a sharp contraction in  Hong Kong, where social and political unrest  resulted in severe economic disruptions, and  by weakness in India, where an ongoing credit  crunch continues to weigh on activity. In  several other Asian economies, GDP growth  held steady but at a lackluster pace amid  headwinds from moderating global growth.  GDP growth in Korea, Taiwan, and the  Philippines rebounded in the last quarter of  2019, consistent with signs of stabilization  in the global manufacturing cycle, especially  in the high-tech sector. However, the recent  emergence of the coronavirus could lead to  disruptions in China that spill over to other  Asian countries and, more generally, to the rest  of the global economy. Many Latin American economies continued to  underperform. Economic stagnation persisted  in Mexico, reflecting both domestic factors—  including market concerns about economic  policies—and external factors, notably,  renewed weakness in U.S. manufacturing  production. Severe social unrest in several  countries—including Chile, Ecuador, and  Bolivia—disrupted economic activity.  Argentina’s financial crisis continued, while  Venezuela’s economy likely continued to  contract. Growth in Brazil, in contrast, edged  up as aggregate demand continued to recover,  supported by further reductions in policy  interest rates.  Financial conditions in emerging market  economies fluctuated but, on net, eased  somewhat  Notwithstanding social and political tensions  as well as concerns about the global outlook,  financial conditions in the emerging market  economies (EMEs) eased somewhat in  the second half of 2019. Conditions were  supported by the accommodative actions  of the FOMC and several foreign central  banks and, later in the year, by progress in  the negotiations between the United States  and its major trading partners as well as  improved prospects about global growth. EME  equity prices generally increased, especially  for Brazil. And measures of EME  sovereign bond spreads over U.S. Treasury  yields generally decreased. Political  tensions in Hong Kong contributed to an  underperformance of Chinese risky assets.  After several months of withdrawals, flows to  dedicated EME mutual funds resumed in the  fourth quarter of 2019, consistent with the  improved sentiment toward global prospects.  However, in reaction to the  emergence of the coronavirus, in late January  equity and bond markets gave up some of  their gains.  The dollar fluctuated but is, on balance,  little changed  The foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar  fluctuated but is, on balance, little changed  compared with last July. While  concerns about global growth and trade  tensions contributed to the appreciation of  the dollar over the summer, monetary policy  easing by the Federal Reserve and progress  on U.S.–China trade negotiations led to a  depreciation of the dollar, especially with  respect to the Chinese renminbi. The British  pound appreciated notably against the dollar  as fears of a disorderly Brexit diminished.  The Federal Open Market Committee  reduced the federal funds rate to support  sustained economic expansion and foster  a return of inflation to the Committee’s  2 percent objective  After having gradually increased its target  range for the federal funds rate from late  2015 through the end of 2018, the Committee  maintained its target range for the federal  funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent during the  first half of 2019. In light of the implications  of global developments for the economic  outlook as well as muted inflation pressures,  the Federal Open Market Committee  (FOMC) lowered the target range for the  federal funds rate at its July, September, and  October meetings by 25 basis points each,  bringing it to 1½ to 1¾ percent.  At its December and January meetings, the  Committee judged that the prevailing stance  of monetary policy was appropriate to support  sustained expansion of economic activity,  strong labor market conditions, and inflation  returning to its symmetric 2 percent objective.  Future changes in the federal funds rate  will depend on the economic outlook  and risks to the outlook as informed by  incoming data  The FOMC has continued to emphasize  that the actual path of monetary policy will  depend on the evolution of the economic  outlook and risks to the outlook as informed  by incoming data. Specifically, in deciding on  the timing and size of future adjustments to  the target range for the federal funds rate, the  Committee will assess realized and expected  economic conditions relative to its objectives  of maximum employment and symmetric  2 percent inflation. This assessment will take  into account a wide range of information,  including measures of labor market conditions,  indicators of inflation pressures and inflation  expectations, and readings on financial and  international developments.  In addition to evaluating a wide range of  economic and financial data and information  gathered from business contacts and other  informed parties around the country,  policymakers routinely consult prescriptions  for the policy interest rate from various  monetary policy rules, which can provide  useful guidance to the FOMC. Although many  practical considerations make it undesirable  for the FOMC to mechanically follow the  prescriptions of any specific rule, the FOMC’s  framework for conducting systematic  monetary policy respects key principles of  good monetary policy embodied by these rules,  while at the same time, providing flexibility to  address many of the limitations of these policy  rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules and  Uncertainty in Monetary Policy Settings”).  The FOMC concluded the reduction of  its aggregate securities holdings in the  System Open Market Account . . .  At its July meeting, along with its decision to  lower the target range for the federal funds  rate, the FOMC also announced that it was  ending the runoff of securities holdings two  months earlier than the initially planned  termination at the end of September. Ending  the runoff earlier than initially planned was  seen as having only very small effects on the  balance sheet, with negligible implications for  the economic outlook. Moreover, doing so  avoided the appearance of inconsistency in  continuing to allow the balance sheet to run  off while simultaneously lowering the target  range for the federal funds rate. Since then, the Federal Reserve has rolled  over at auction all principal payments from  its holdings of Treasury securities and has  reinvested all principal payments from its  holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage backed securities (MBS) received during each  calendar month. The Committee intends to  continue to reduce its holdings of agency  debt and agency MBS, consistent with the  aim of holding primarily Treasury securities  in the long run. To allow for a gradual runoff  of the MBS portfolio, principal payments  from agency debt and agency MBS of up to  $20 billion per month have been reinvested  in Treasury securities; agency MBS principal  payments in excess of $20 billion each month  have been reinvested in agency MBS.  . . . and reaffirmed its intention to  implement monetary policy in a regime  with an ample supply of reserves  In a monetary policy regime with an ample  supply of reserves, control over the level of  the federal funds rate and other short-term  interest rates is exercised primarily through the  setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered  rates, and active management of the supply  of reserves is not required. The Federal  Reserve will still conduct periodic open market  operations as necessary to accommodate the  trend growth in the demand for its nonreserve  liabilities, such as currency in circulation, and  maintain an ample supply of reserves over  time. Separate from such periodic open market  operations, beginning in October 2019, the  Federal Reserve has implemented a temporary  program of open market operations,  specifically Treasury bill purchases, aimed  at durably raising reserves to levels at or  above those prevailing in early September. These actions are purely  technical measures to support the effective  implementation of the FOMC’s monetary  policy and are not intended to change the  stance of monetary policy. These Treasury  bill purchases are distinct from the large-scale  asset purchase programs that the Federal  Reserve deployed after the financial crisis. In  those programs, the Federal Reserve purchased  longer-term securities to put downward  pressure on longer-term interest rates and ease  broader financial conditions.  The Federal Reserve’s total assets have  increased from about $3.8 trillion last July to  about $4.1 trillion at present, with holdings  of Treasury securities at approximately  $2.4 trillion and holdings of agency debt and  agency MBS at approximately $1.4 trillion. The increase in the size of the  balance sheet partly reflects an increase in  the level of nonreserve liabilities—such as  currency in circulation and the TGA—and a  rise in the level of reserve balances, which have  increased from approximately $1.5 trillion last  July to approximately $1.6 trillion at present.  Meanwhile, interest income on the Federal  Reserve’s securities holdings has continued  to result in substantial remittances to the  U.S. Treasury. Preliminary data indicate that  the Federal Reserve remitted about $55 billion  in 2019.  The effective federal funds rate moved  down in line with the FOMC’s target  range for the federal funds rate  The Federal Reserve reduced the effective  federal funds rate following the FOMC’s  decisions in July, September, and October to  lower the target range for the federal funds rate  by reducing the interest rate paid on required  and excess reserve balances and the interest  rate offered on overnight reverse repurchase  agreements (ON RRPs). Specifically, the  Federal Reserve lowered the interest rate paid  on required and excess reserve balances to  2.10 percent in July, 1.80 percent in September,  and 1.55 percent in October. In addition,  the Federal Reserve lowered the ON RRP  offering rate to 2 percent in July, 1.70 percent  in September, and 1.45 percent in October. The  Federal Reserve also approved a ¼ percentage  point decrease in the discount rate (the  primary credit rate) in July, September, and  October. Yields on a broad set of money  market instruments also moved lower, roughly  in line with the effective federal funds rate, in  response to the FOMC’s policy decisions in  July, September, and October. The Federal Reserve continued the  review of its strategic framework for  monetary policy  In the second half of 2019, the Federal  Reserve continued the review of its monetary  policy strategy, tools, and communication  practices. The goal of this assessment is  to identify possible ways to improve the  Committee’s current policy framework in  order to ensure that the Federal Reserve is  best positioned going forward to achieve its  statutory mandate of maximum employment  and price stability. (The box “Federal Reserve  Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools,  and Communication Practices” discusses  the review and the public outreach that has  accompanied it.) Monetary policy rules are mathematical formulas  that relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal  funds rate, to a small number of other economic  variables—typically including the deviation of inflation  from its target value and a measure of resource slack in  the economy. The prescriptions for the policy interest  rate from these rules can provide helpful guidance for  the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).  This discussion examines prescriptions from selected  policy rules and considers how these prescriptions  often depend on judgments and assumptions about  economic variables that are inherently uncertain and  may change over time. Notably, many policy rules  depend on estimates of resource slack and of the  longer-run neutral real interest rate, both of which  are not directly observable and are estimated with  a high degree of uncertainty. As a result, the policy  stance that these rules prescribe—and whether that  stance is appropriate in light of underlying economic  conditions—is also uncertain. Such a situation cautions  against mechanically following the prescriptions of any  specific rule.  Policy Rules: Some Key Design Principles  and Historical Prescriptions  In many models of the economy, good economic  performance can be achieved by following a monetary  policy rule that fosters public understanding and that  incorporates key principles of good monetary policy.  One such principle is that monetary policy should  respond in a predictable way to changes in economic  conditions. A second principle is that monetary policy  should be accommodative when inflation is below  policymakers’ longer-run inflation objective and  employment is below its maximum sustainable level;  conversely, monetary policy should be restrictive when  the opposite holds. A third principle is that, to stabilize  inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted over time  by more than one-for-one in response to persistent  increases or decreases in inflation.  Economists have analyzed many monetary policy  rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the  “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)”  rule, the “price level” rule, and the “first difference”  rule. These policy rules embody the three  key principles of good monetary policy and take into  account estimates of how far the economy is from the  Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate goals of maximum  employment and price stability. The Taylor (1993),  balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), and  price-level rules provide prescriptions for the level of  the federal funds rate; all require an estimate of the  neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt LR)—that is,  the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected  to be consistent, in the longer run, with maximum  employment and stable inflation. The rules feature the  unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference  between an estimate of the rate of unemployment that  is sustainable in the longer run (ut LR) and the current  unemployment rate; the first-difference rule includes  the change in the unemployment gap rather than its  level. In addition, four of the five rules include the  difference between recent inflation and the FOMC’s  longer-run objective of 2 percent, whereas the price level rule includes the gap between the level of prices  today and the level of prices that would have been  realized if inflation had been constant at 2 percent from  a specified starting year. The price-level rule thereby  takes account of the deviation of inflation from the  longer-run objective in earlier periods as well as in the  current period, in contrast with the other rules that do  not make up past misses of the inflation objective.  The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that  the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially  below zero and that following the prescriptions  of the standard Taylor (1993) rule after a recession  during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its  effective lower bound may therefore not provide  enough policy accommodation. To make up for the  cumulative shortfall in accommodation, the adjusted  Taylor (1993) rule prescribes only a gradual return of  the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the  standard Taylor (1993) rule after the economy begins  to recover. Similarly, the price-level rule specified in  figure A recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be  reduced materially below zero. If inflation runs below  the 2 percent objective during periods when the policy  rate is constrained by the effective lower bound, this  rule will, over time, call for more accommodation to  make up for the past inflation shortfall.  Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the  federal funds rate from the five rules described earlier.  For each period, the figure reports the policy rates  prescribed by the rules given prevailing economic  conditions and estimates of ut LR and rt LR at the time.  The prescribed values often vary widely across rules.  Because there is no definitive standard for favoring  one rule over another, consulting a range of rules is  generally preferable to relying on any particular rule.  Estimates of rt LR and ut LR: Uncertainty and  Revisions  As already noted, the level of the neutral real interest  rate and the unemployment rate that is sustainable in  the longer run is not directly observable and can be  estimated only imprecisely. The neutral real interest  rate in the longer run is determined by structural  features of the economy, including trend productivity  growth, demographics, and risk-taking behavior. The  unemployment rate that can be sustained in the longer  run is also determined largely by nonmonetary factors,  such as demographics, educational attainment, and  the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These  various determining factors may change over time and  may not be directly measurable, hence leading to time varying and uncertain estimates of ut LR and rt LR.  Since 2000, forecasters in the Blue Chip survey  have markedly reduced their estimates of the longer run level of the real short-term interest rate.  FOMC participants have also lowered their estimates  of the real federal funds rate in the longer run since  the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, began  reporting this information in 2012. Similarly, in recent  years, FOMC participants as well as outside forecasters  and analysts generally have lowered their estimates of  the longer-run unemployment rate considerably.  Figure D illustrates the imprecision with which  the longer-run neutral real interest rate is estimated  by reporting values from several time-series models,  along with measures of the uncertainty surrounding  these values. The models use statistical techniques to  capture the variations among inflation, interest rates,  real gross domestic product, unemployment, and other  data series. The point estimates are dispersed across  models, ranging from 0.3 to 2.1 percent. Moreover,  the 95 percent uncertainty bands around the estimates  illustrate the substantial uncertainty inherent in such  estimates. Some Implications for Monetary Policy  The longer-run neutral level of the federal funds  rate—equal to the sum of the neutral real interest  rate in the longer run and the FOMC’s 2 percent  inflation objective—is one benchmark for evaluating  the current stance of monetary policy. Uncertainty about estimates of the longer-run neutral real interest  rate leads to uncertainty about how far the current  federal funds rate is from its longer-run neutral level.  For the Taylor (1993), balanced-approach, adjusted  Taylor (1993), and price-level rules, a decrease in the  assumed longer-run neutral real interest rate translates  one-for-one into a decline in these rules’ prescribed  settings for the federal funds rate. Therefore, to the  extent that the downward revisions to estimates  of rt LR reflect learning that the longer-run neutral  rate was lower than had been assessed previously,  the historical prescriptions of these rules would  be less accommodative than previously thought.  Uncertainty about estimates of the longer-run normal  unemployment rate also imparts uncertainty to these  rules’ prescriptions. For example, given current  economic conditions, the assumption of a lower  sustainable rate of unemployment in the longer run  translates one-for-one into reduced unemployment  gaps in the rules and, in turn, leads to lower prescribed  values of the policy rate.  Figure E compares the prescriptions of the Taylor  (1993) rule based on the historical median estimates  of ut LR and rt LR from the Blue Chip survey and the prescriptions generated based on the  latest median estimates of these variables. The federal  funds rate prescriptions based on the latest estimates  (black line) are lower than the prescriptions based on  the historical estimates (red line). For example, using  the latest median estimates, the rule’s prescribed federal  funds rates for 2012 are about 3 percentage points  lower than the values prescribed based on the historical  estimates. Figure E also shows that revisions to the  estimates of ut LR and rt LR contribute roughly equally to  the difference in the policy rate prescriptions of the  Taylor (1993) rule based on the historical and the latest  estimates of ut LR and rt LR.   To conclude, this discussion illustrates that policy  rules crucially entail an important element of judgment.  Moreover, the inherent uncertainty about some of the  variables included in these rules leads to significant  uncertainty regarding their policy settings, which  cautions against strict adherence to any particular rule. Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools,  and Communication Practices Overview  In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad  review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and  communication practices it uses to pursue its statutory  dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and  price stability. The Federal Reserve is undertaking the  review because the U.S. economy appears to have  changed in ways that matter for monetary policy. For  example, the neutral level of the policy interest rate  appears to have fallen in the United States and abroad,  increasing the risk that the effective lower bound on  interest rates will constrain central banks from reducing  their policy interest rates enough to effectively support  economic activity during downturns. The review is  considering what monetary policy strategy will best  enable the Federal Reserve to meet its dual mandate  in the future, whether the existing monetary policy  tools are sufficient to achieve and maintain the dual  mandate, and how its communication about monetary  policy can be improved.  Fed Listens Initiative  A key component of the review has been a series  of public Fed Listens events aimed at consulting with  a broad range of stakeholders in the U.S. economy.  The goal of Fed Listens was for policymakers to engage  directly with a range of individuals and groups on  issues pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives of  maximum employment and stable prices.  From February to October 2019, the Federal Reserve  hosted 14 public Fed Listens events—one at the Board  of Governors, one at each of the 12 Reserve Banks, and  a System research conference at the Federal Reserve  Bank of Chicago. The events featured a broad range of  participants drawn from the System’s existing advisory  councils and community networks and from outreach  conducted specifically for the Fed Listens initiative. The  participants represented small businesses, labor unions,  state and local governments, schools and community  colleges, workforce development organizations,  housing groups, community development financial  institutions (CDFIs), retirees, and academia.  Most of the events were conducted in a town  hall format with one or more panel sessions. A few  incorporated site visits to schools and businesses  to learn about local initiatives in underserved  communities to increase education, combine high  school completion with work experience, or offer  after-hours vocational training to enhance skill levels.  At the events, participants were asked how  they viewed the relative importance of maximum  employment and price stability and how monetary  policy actions affected them and the people they  represent. Participants commented on labor market  conditions and whether they saw those conditions  as consistent with the dual-mandate objective of  maximum employment; they also offered perspectives  on inflation, lending conditions, and how people  in their organizations or communities responded to  interest rate changes. In addition, participants often  compared economic conditions today with conditions  a few years or a decade ago and assessed the Federal  Reserve’s public communications. In keeping with  the transparency of the review, all of the events were  livestreamed, with written summaries of the events  posted on System websites afterward. Takeaways from Fed Listens  While the Fed Listens events covered a broad range  of topics, participants consistently highlighted a few  points. Representatives of disadvantaged communities  generally saw the strong labor market as providing  significant benefits to their constituents—primarily by  providing job opportunities for people who had had  difficulty finding jobs in the past. These representatives  also expressed concern about how newly hired workers  would fare in the next downturn and whether the job  experience they will have acquired by then would  allow them to retain their jobs during the downturn or  obtain jobs easily after the economy recovers.  Small business owners and representatives from  business organizations said finding qualified workers  to fill available positions was a challenge in the current  labor market conditions. As a result, businesses are  partnering with workforce development agencies or  community colleges to devise training programs or  specialized curriculums to prepare would-be workers.  In addition, firms have been more willing to hire people  who would not have been considered in less favorable  labor market conditions. However, businesses generally  are not increasing wages to attract and retain workers.  Instead, they are offering new training or education  programs and adding or augmenting health-care and  other benefits.  While businesses and CDFIs generally found  low interest rates to be beneficial, representatives  of underserved populations and retirees conveyed  different views. Many people in lower-income  communities generally have little or no access to  conventional credit. Consequently, they often do not  benefit when interest rates on conventional credit fall as  a result of the Fed’s actions. In addition, we heard that  retirees with savings have seen interest income on their  savings decline. Participants acknowledged that inflation is low,  and representatives of small businesses or business  associations emphasized the importance of stable and  predictable inflation for planning and decisionmaking.  Participants representing retirees said rising costs of  health care and prescription drugs pose challenges for  people on fixed incomes, while representatives of low and middle-income communities said the people they  represent still struggle to afford basic necessities such  as housing, utilities, and food. Participants generally  did not regard the fact that aggregate inflation is  running modestly below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent  objective as a problem. That perception highlights  a challenge for the Federal Reserve as it publicly  communicates about the rationale for the review and  the importance of anchoring inflation expectations at  2 percent for keeping policy interest rates sufficiently  above the effective lower bound.  Policymaker Discussions  Since the summer of 2019, Federal Reserve  policymakers have been discussing issues associated  with the monetary policy strategy review at meetings  of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). At  its July, September, and October meetings, the FOMC  reviewed the performance of its current approach to  monetary policy, discussed possible alternative policy  strategies, and reviewed policy tools. Key points of  these discussions have been summarized in publicly  released meeting minutes. In December, the FOMC  considered the views offered at the Fed Listens events  together with staff analysis on the distributional effects  of monetary policy. The FOMC’s discussions are  continuing into 2020. Policymakers expect to complete  the review around the middle of this year. At that time,  policymakers will report their findings to the public. Money Market Developments and Monetary  Policy Implementation Consistent with its decision at the January 2019  meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)  reaffirmed, in its Statement Regarding Monetary Policy  Implementation on October 11, 2019, the intention  to implement monetary policy in a regime with an  ample supply of reserves. In such a system, active  management of reserves through frequent open market  operations is not required, and control over the level of  the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates  is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal  Reserve’s administered rates.  In recent years, depository institutions’ reserve  balances held at the Federal Reserve have declined as  a result of the normalization of the Federal Reserve’s  balance sheet as well as growth in nonreserve  liabilities. Reserves dropped from a peak of about  $2.8 trillion in 2014 to about $2.2 trillion in late  September 2017, largely reflecting the expansion of  nonreserve liabilities. Subsequently, reserves declined  further, reflecting the FOMC’s decision to allow a  gradual runoff of maturing securities, and, by the  time the FOMC decided to conclude the reduction  of its aggregate securities holdings in August 2019,  reserves had fallen to about $1.5 trillion. Despite the  cessation of balance sheet runoff in August 2019,  reserves subsequently continued to decline because of  increases in currency and other nonreserve liabilities  and reached a multiyear low of about $1.4 trillion in  September 2019.  Against a backdrop of declining reserves and high  levels of Treasury securities outstanding, in mid- September 2019, imbalances in the supply of and  demand for short-term funding led to pressures in  the repurchase agreement (repo) market—a money  market segment in which banks, securities dealers,  money market funds (MMFs), and other financial  market participants lend to and borrow from each  other for short periods against high-quality collateral.  On the demand side, dealers’ and other investors’  needs for financing securities had increased following  the settlement of Treasury auctions at mid-month. On  the supply side, some institutional investors, such as  government-only MMFs and banks, may have been  reluctant to increase lending because they faced  uncertainty regarding cash outflows as their clients  were making corporate tax payments due in mid September. As a result, repo rates rose sharply in  mid-September. Pressures in the repo market  spilled over to other short-term funding markets,  including the federal funds market. The federal funds  rate firmed, moving out of its target range for one day. In response to elevated rates,  the Federal Reserve began conducting repo operations  to help stabilize money markets and provide reserves  to keep the federal funds rate within its target range. These operations have been effective in  meeting these goals.  Consistent with its decision to implement monetary  policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves,  on October 11, 2019, the Committee announced its  decision to purchase Treasury bills at least into the  second quarter of 2020 in order to maintain reserves at  or above the level that prevailed in early September. In addition, the FOMC announced  term and overnight repo operations to ensure that  the supply of reserves remains ample even during  periods of sharp increases in nonreserve liabilities and  to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that  could adversely affect policy implementation. Repos  outstanding, consisting of both overnight and term  operations, have been about $209 billion per day,  on average, since the announcement on  October 11, 2019. These operations are expected to  decline over time as Treasury bill purchases supply a  larger base of reserves.  The Federal Reserve’s open market operations—  repo operations and bill purchases—lifted reserves  to levels averaging about $1.6 trillion in early 2020.  Besides adding reserves, the repo operations damped  funding pressures in repo markets that may otherwise  have passed through to the federal funds market. As  such, the combination of repo operations and bill  purchases fostered conditions that helped maintain  the federal funds rate within the target range. Notably,  with the provision of about $250 billion in liquidity via  the Federal Reserve’s repo operations, money market  conditions were quite calm on year-end. Both secured  and unsecured overnight funding rates printed in line  with the interest rate on excess reserves. summary of eConomiC ProjeCtions In conjunction with the Federal Open  Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on  December 10–11, 2019, meeting participants  submitted their projections of the most likely  outcomes for real gross domestic product  (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and  inflation for each year from 2019 to 2022  and over the longer run. Each participant’s  projections were based on information  available at the time of the meeting, together  with his or her assessment of appropriate  monetary policy—including a path for the  federal funds rate and its longer-run value—  and assumptions about other factors likely  to affect economic outcomes. The longer run projections represent each participant’s  assessment of the value to which each variable  would be expected to converge, over time,  under appropriate monetary policy and in the  absence of further shocks to the economy.  “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as  the future path of policy that each participant  deems most likely to foster outcomes for  economic activity and inflation that best  satisfy his or her individual interpretation of  the statutory mandate to promote maximum  employment and price stability.  Almost all participants expected that, under  appropriate monetary policy, growth of real  GDP in 2020 would run at or slightly above  1.9 percent, the median of current estimates  of its longer-run rate. The median of the  projections for the growth rate of real GDP  edges down each year over the projection  horizon and, for 2022, is modestly below the  median of the current estimates of its  longer-run rate. The median of the current  projections for the unemployment rate was  lower than that in the September Summary of  Economic Projections (SEP) for each year of  the projection period, and some participants  reduced their estimates of the longer-run  normal rate of unemployment, resulting in  a slight decline in the median estimate. The  medians of the projections for both total and  core inflation, as measured by the four-quarter  percent change in the price index for personal  consumption expenditures (PCE), increase  significantly from 2019 to 2020 and more  modestly in 2021 to reach 2 percent that year.  Almost all participants expected that inflation  would be at or slightly above the Committee’s  2 percent objective in 2021 and 2022. A couple  more participants, relative to the September  SEP, projected inflation to exceed 2 percent  at some point during the projection period.  The medians of the projections for both total  and core inflation were unchanged for 2020  through 2022, compared with the September  SEP. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary  statistics for the projections.  As shown in figure 2, a substantial majority of  participants indicated that their expectations  regarding the evolution of the economy,  relative to the Committee’s objectives of  maximum employment and 2 percent inflation,  would likely warrant keeping the federal  funds at its current level through the end of  2020. Compared with the September SEP  submissions, the median projection for the  federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower  in each year over the projection period and  retained its modest upward tilt in 2021 and  2022. The median of participants’ assessments  of the appropriate level for the federal funds  rate in 2022 was slightly below the median of  estimates of its longer-run level; the median  estimate of the longer-run level was unchanged  from its value in the September SEP.  Most participants regarded the uncertainties  around their projections as broadly similar  to the average over the past 20 years. The  majority of participants continued to assess  the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth  as weighted to the downside and for the  unemployment rate as weighted to the upside.  However, compared with the September  submissions, several participants shifted their  assessments of the balance of risks around  these projections to being broadly balanced.  Most participants judged the risks to their  inflation outlook as broadly balanced, though  one-third of participants viewed the risks to  their inflation projections as weighted to the  downside; no participant assessed the risks  to his or her inflation outlook as weighted  to the upside. The uncertainties and risks  around participants’ projections for headline  and core inflation were little changed from the  September SEP.  The Outlook for Real GDP Growth  and Unemployment  As shown in table 1, the medians of  participants’ projections for real GDP  growth in 2019 and 2020, conditional on  their individual assessments of appropriate  monetary policy, were 2.2 percent and  2.0 percent, respectively, a touch above the  median estimate of the longer-run growth rate  of 1.9 percent. The median of the projections  for the growth rate of real GDP declines slowly  over the projection horizon and, in 2022, is  modestly below the median of the current  estimates of its longer-run rate. The medians  of the projections for real GDP growth in all  four years of the projection period, as well as  in the longer run, were unchanged from the  September SEP.  A majority of participants marked down  their projections of the unemployment rate in  each year of the projection period, and some  participants lowered their estimates of the  longer-run normal rate of unemployment.  As a result, the medians of the projections  for the unemployment rate in the fourth  quarter of 2020 through 2022 were  3.5 percent, 3.6 percent, and 3.7 percent,  respectively, each 0.2 percentage point lower  than in the September projections. The  median estimate of the longer-run normal  rate of unemployment was 4.1 percent,  0.1 percentage point lower than in September.  Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions  of participants’ projections for real GDP  growth and the unemployment rate,  respectively, from 2019 to 2022 and in the  longer run. The distribution of individual  projections for real GDP growth for 2020  tilted slightly higher, as many participants  upgraded their projections a bit relative to  those in the September SEP, although the  median projection was unchanged. The  distributions of individual projections of real  GDP growth in 2021 and 2022 and in the  longer run were little changed overall. The  distributions of individual projections for the  unemployment rate from 2020 to 2022 and in  the longer run shifted lower relative to those  in September. The Outlook for Inflation  As shown in table 1, the median projection for  core PCE price inflation was 1.6 percent for  2019, a modest decrease from the September  projections. The medians of the projections  for both total and core PCE price inflation  were each 1.9 percent in 2020 and 2.0 percent  in both 2021 and 2022—all unchanged from  September. Figures 3.C and 3.D show the  distributions of participants’ views about  their outlooks for inflation. Although the  medians of the projections for total and core  PCE price inflation from 2020 through 2022  were unchanged from the September SEP, a  couple more participants projected inflation  to be slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent  objective in 2022.  Appropriate Monetary Policy  Figure 3.E shows the distributions of  participants’ judgments regarding the  appropriate target—or midpoint of the target  range—for the federal funds rate at the end  of each year from 2019 to 2022 and over  the longer run. A substantial majority of  participants projected a federal funds rate  of 1.63 percent for the end of 2020. Four  participants assessed that the most likely  appropriate rate at year-end for 2020 would  be 1.88 percent. For subsequent years, the  medians of the projections were 1.88 percent  at the end of 2021 and 2.13 percent at the  end of 2022. The distribution of participants’  estimates of the longer-run level of the federal  funds rate was little changed, and the median  estimate was unchanged from September at  2.50 percent.  Compared with the projections prepared for  the September SEP, a number of participants  marked down their assessments of the  appropriate level of the federal funds rate  at the end of 2020, reflecting in part the  reduction in the target range at the October  meeting and causing both the range and  central tendency of projections for 2020  to narrow considerably. Some participants  lowered their projections for the appropriate  level in 2021 and 2022. The median projection  for the federal funds rate was 25 basis points  lower in each year in the projection period.  Realized inflation running persistently below  target and risks associated with trade policy  and foreign economic growth were cited as  key factors informing participants’ judgments  about the appropriate path for the federal  funds rate.  Uncertainty and Risks  In assessing the appropriate path of the federal  funds rate, FOMC participants take account  of the range of possible economic outcomes,  the likelihood of those outcomes, and the  potential benefits and costs should they occur.  As a reference, table 2 provides measures of  forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast  errors of various private and government  forecasts over the past 20 years—for real  GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and  total PCE price inflation. Those measures are  represented graphically in the “fan charts”  shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B,  and 4.C. The fan charts display the SEP  medians for the three variables surrounded  by symmetric confidence intervals derived  from the forecast errors reported in table 2.  If the degree of uncertainty attending these  projections is similar to the typical magnitude  of past forecast errors and the risks around the  projections are broadly balanced, then future  outcomes of these variables would have about  a 70 percent probability of being within these  confidence intervals. For all three variables,  this measure of uncertainty is substantial and  generally increases as the forecast horizon  lengthens.  Participants’ assessments of the level of  uncertainty surrounding their individual  economic projections are shown in the bottom left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. A  substantial majority of participants viewed  the uncertainty surrounding each of the four  economic variables as being broadly similar to  the average over the past 20 years.  Because the fan charts are constructed to be  symmetric around the median projections,  they do not reflect any asymmetries in the  balance of risks that participants may see  in their economic projections. Participants’  assessments of the balance of risks to their  current economic projections are shown in  the bottom-right panels of figures 4.A, 4.B,  and 4.C. Relative to the September SEP, more  participants saw the risks to the outlook for  real GDP growth and the unemployment  rate as broadly balanced, although a small  majority continued to view the risks to their  outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to  the downside and for the unemployment rate  as weighted to the upside. Most participants  continued to judge the risks to their inflation  outlook as broadly balanced, while some  participants viewed the risks to their inflation  outlook as weighted to the downside. No  participant assessed the risks to his or her  inflation outlook as weighted to the upside.  In discussing the uncertainty and risks  surrounding their economic projections, some  participants mentioned trade developments  and concerns about foreign economic growth  as sources of uncertainty or downside risk  to the U.S. economic growth outlook. In  contrast, the underlying strength of both  consumer spending and the labor market  was cited as balancing the risks around the  growth outlook. In addition, most of the  participants who shifted their balance of risks  for output growth to “broadly balanced” cited  more accommodative monetary policy as a  contributing factor. For the inflation outlook,  the possibility that inflation expectations  could be drifting below levels consistent with  the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective  was viewed as a downside risk. A couple of  participants mentioned higher tariffs as a  source of upside risk to their inflation outlook.  Participants’ assessments of the appropriate  future path of the federal funds rate are also  subject to considerable uncertainty. Because  the Committee adjusts the federal funds  rate in response to actual and prospective  developments over time in key economic  variables—such as real GDP growth,  the unemployment rate, and inflation—  uncertainty surrounding the projected path  for the federal funds rate importantly reflects  the uncertainties about the paths for these  economic variables, along with other factors.  Figure 5 provides a graphic representation  of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median  for the federal funds rate surrounded by  symmetric confidence intervals derived from  the results presented in table 2. As with  the macroeconomic variables, the forecast  uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path  of the federal funds rate is substantial and  increases for longer horizons. Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the  members of the Board of Governors and the presidents  of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of  monetary policy among policymakers and can aid  public understanding of the basis for policy actions.  Considerable uncertainty attends these projections,  however. The economic and statistical models and  relationships used to help produce economic forecasts  are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real  world, and the future path of the economy can be  affected by myriad unforeseen developments and  events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy,  participants consider not only what appears to be  the most likely economic outcome as embodied in  their projections, but also the range of alternative  possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the  potential costs to the economy should they occur.  Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy  of a range of forecasts, including those reported in  past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared  by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of  meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee  (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the  table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated  with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a  participant projects that real gross domestic product  (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at  annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent.  If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar  to that experienced in the past and the risks around  the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers  reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about  70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a  range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.4 to  4.6 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent  in the third and fourth years. The corresponding  70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation  would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1  to 2.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent  in the third year, and 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the  fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these  confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric  and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’  projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate,  and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks  around the projections may not be symmetric. In  particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative;  furthermore, the risks around a particular projection  might be tilted to either the upside or the downside,  in which case the corresponding fan chart would  be asymmetrically positioned around the median  projection.  Because current conditions may differ from those  that prevailed, on average, over history, participants  provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty  attached to their projections of each economic  variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly  similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen  in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and  reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals  shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.  Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty  surrounding their projections are summarized in the  bottom-left panels of those figures. Participants also  provide judgments as to whether the risks to their  projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted  to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,  while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in  the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that  the risks to participants’ projections are balanced,  participants may judge that there is a greater risk that  a given variable will be above rather than below their  projections. These judgments are summarized in the  lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.  As with real activity and inflation, the outlook  for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject  to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises  primarily because each participant’s assessment of  the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends  importantly on the evolution of real activity and  inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve  in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the  appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would  change from that point forward. The final line in  table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short term interest rates. They suggest that the historical  confidence intervals associated with projections  of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should  be noted, however, that these confidence intervals  are not strictly consistent with the projections for  the federal funds rate, as these projections are not  forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but  rather are projections of participants’ individual  assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are  on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors  should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the  future path of the federal funds rate generated by the  uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as  well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that  would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to  the economy.  If at some point in the future the confidence  interval around the federal funds rate were to extend  below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes  of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom  of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate  that has been adopted by the Committee in the past.  This approach to the construction of the federal funds  rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would  not have any implications for possible future policy  decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to  provide additional monetary policy accommodation  if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the  Committee could also employ other tools, including  forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide  additional accommodation.  While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information  on the uncertainty around the economic projections,  figure 1 provides information on the range of views  across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1  with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion  of the projections across participants is much smaller  than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years.
Summary The COVID-19 outbreak is causing  tremendous human and economic hardship  across the United States and around the world.  The virus and the measures taken to protect  public health have induced a sharp decline in  economic activity and a surge in job losses,  with the unemployment rate, which had been  at a 50-year low, soaring to a postwar record  high. Weaker demand and significantly lower  oil prices are holding down consumer price  inflation. The disruptions to economic activity  here and abroad significantly affected financial  conditions and impaired the flow of credit to  U.S. households and businesses. In response  to these developments, the Federal Reserve  quickly lowered its policy rate to close to  zero to support economic activity and took  extraordinary measures to stabilize markets  and bolster the flow of credit to households,  businesses, and communities. Financial  conditions have improved, in part reflecting  policy measures to support the economy and  the flow of credit. The Federal Reserve is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximumemployment and price-stability goals. Economic and Financial  Developments Economic activity. In response to the public  health emergency precipitated by the spread  of COVID-19, many protective measures were  adopted to limit the transmission of the virus.  These social-distancing measures effectively  closed parts of the economy, resulting in a  sudden and unprecedented fall in economic  activity and historic increases in joblessness.  Although virus mitigation efforts in many  places did not begin until the final two weeks of  March, real personal consumption expenditures  (PCE) plummeted 6.7 percent in March and an  unprecedented 13.2 percent in April. Indicators  suggest spending rose in May, but the April  data and May indicators taken together point  to a collapse in second-quarter real PCE.  Likewise, in the housing market, residential  sales and construction in April posted outsized  declines that are close to some of the largest  ever recorded, and heightened uncertainty  and weak demand have led many businesses  to put investment plans on hold or cancel  them outright. These data, along with other  information, suggest that real gross domestic  product will contract at a rapid pace in the  second quarter after tumbling at an annual rate  of 5 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The labor market. The severe economic  repercussions of the pandemic have been  especially visible in the labor market. Since  February, employers have shed nearly  20 million jobs from payrolls, reversing almost  10 years of job gains. The unemployment rate  jumped from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent  in February to a post–World War II high  of 14.7 percent in April and then moved  down to a still very elevated 13.3 percent  in May. The most severe job losses have  been sustained by those with lower earnings  and by the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among lowwage jobs. Inflation. Consumer price inflation has slowed  abruptly. The 12-month change in the price  index for PCE was just 0.5 percent in April.  The 12-month measure of PCE inflation that  excludes food and energy items (so-called  core inflation), which historically has been  a better indicator of where overall inflation  will be in the future than the total figure, fell  from 1.8 percent in February to 1.0 percent in  April. This slowing reflected monthly readings  for March and April that were especially  low because of large price declines in some  categories most directly affected by social  distancing. Overall inflation also has been held  down by substantially lower energy prices,  which more than offset the effects of surging  prices for food. Despite the sharp slowing in inflation, survey-based measures of longerrun inflation expectations have generally been  stable at relatively low levels. However, marketbased measures of inflation compensation have  moved down to some of the lowest readings  ever seen. Financial conditions. In late February and  over much of March as COVID-19 spread,  equity prices plunged and nominal Treasury  yields dropped substantially, with yields  on longer-term securities reaching all-time  record lows. Spreads of yields on corporate  bonds over those on comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened significantly as  the credit quality of firms declined and market  functioning deteriorated; in addition, loans  were unavailable for most firms, particularly  firms below investment grade. At the most  acute phase of this period, trading conditions  became extremely illiquid and some critical  markets stopped functioning properly.  Consumer borrowing also fell as spending  slumped. Several markets supporting consumer  lending experienced severe strains around  this period, including the agency residential  mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market  as well as the auto, credit card, and student  loan securitization markets. In response, the  Federal Reserve took unprecedented measures  to restore smooth market functioning and to  support the flow of credit in the economy,  including the creation of a number of  emergency credit and liquidity facilities.1  These  actions, along with the aggressive response  of fiscal policy, stabilized financial markets  and led to a notable improvement in financial  conditions for both firms and households as  well as state and local governments. Even so,  lending standards for both households and  businesses have become less accommodative,  and borrowing conditions are tight for low rated households and businesses. 1 A list of funding, credit, liquidity, and loan facilities  established by the Federal Reserve in response to  COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-andloan-facilities.htm. Financial stability. The COVID-19 pandemic  has abruptly halted large swaths of economic  activity and led to swift financial repercussions.  Despite increased resilience from the financial  and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably  those associated with liquidity and maturity  transformation in the nonbank financial  sector—have amplified some of the economic  effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected  to be significant in the near term. The strains  on household and business balance sheets  from the economic and financial shocks since  March will likely create persistent fragilities.  Financial institutions may experience strains  as a result. The Federal Reserve, with approval  of the Secretary of the Treasury, established  new credit and liquidity facilities under  section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to  alleviate severe dislocations that arose in a  number of financial markets and to support  the flow of credit to households, businesses,  and state and local governments. Furthermore,  as financial stresses abroad risked spilling  over into U.S. credit markets, the Federal  Reserve and several other central banks  announced the expansion and enhancement  of dollar liquidity swap lines. In addition, the  Federal Reserve introduced a new temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  monetary authorities. The Federal Reserve  has also made a number of adjustments to its  regulatory and supervisory regime to facilitate  market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected  by COVID-19. International developments. The spread of  COVID-19 throughout the world and the  measures taken to contain it have produced  devastating effects on the global economy.  Amid widespread and stringent shutdowns,  recent data suggest that global economic  activity in the first half of the year has  experienced a sharp and synchronized  contraction greater than that in the Global  Financial Crisis. The many mandated closures of nonessential businesses abroad and the  collapse in consumer demand contributed to  a significant deterioration in labor markets  and subdued inflation. Unlike past recessions,  services activity in the foreign economies has  dropped more sharply than manufacturing,  with restrictions on movement having  severely curtailed spending on travel, tourism,  restaurants, and recreation. Against this  backdrop, foreign governments and central  banks have responded strongly and swiftly  to support incomes and to improve market  liquidity and the provision of credit. More  recently, economic activity has begun to revive  in some foreign economies as authorities eased  social-distancing restraints. The rapid spread of COVID-19 weighed  heavily on global risk sentiment, with financial  stresses intensifying and liquidity conditions  deteriorating in many foreign financial  markets. Aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy responses in the United States and  abroad, however, helped boost sentiment and  improve market functioning. On balance,  financial conditions abroad remain tighter  than at the beginning of the year, especially  in some emerging market economies. Since  February, global equity prices moved lower,  sovereign interest rates in the European  periphery increased somewhat, and measures  of sovereign spreads in emerging market  economies widened significantly. In many  advanced economies, long-term interest rates  reached historically low levels. Monetary Policy Easing monetary policy. In light of the effects  of COVID-19 on economic activity and  on risks to the outlook, the FOMC rapidly  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate. Specifically, at two meetings in March,  the FOMC lowered the target range for the  federal funds rate by a total of 1½ percentage  points, bringing it to the current range of 0 to  ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain  this target range until it is confident that the  economy has weathered recent events and is on  track to achieve its maximum-employment and  price-stability goals. The Committee noted that  it would continue to monitor the implications  of incoming information for the economic  outlook, including information related to  public health, as well as global developments  and muted inflation pressures, and that it  would use its tools and act as appropriate to  support the economy. Safeguarding market functioning. Market  functioning deteriorated in many markets  in late February and much of March,  including the critical Treasury and agency  MBS markets. The Federal Reserve swiftly  took a series of policy actions to address  these developments. The FOMC announced  it would purchase Treasury securities and  agency MBS in the amounts needed to  ensure smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy  to broader financial conditions. The Open  Market Desk began offering large-scale  overnight and term repurchase agreement  operations. The Federal Reserve coordinated  with other central banks to enhance the  provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  announced the establishment of temporary  U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap  lines) with additional central banks. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  and international monetary authorities.  (Separately, the Board introduced several  facilities with the backing of the U.S. Treasury  to more directly support the flow of credit to  the economy.) Since these policy actions were  announced, the functioning of Treasury and  MBS markets has gradually improved. Reflecting these policy  responses, the size of the Federal Reserve’s  balance sheet increased significantly.  Fed Listens. The Federal Reserve has released a  report on its Fed Listens initiative. This initiative  is part of a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices  the Federal Reserve uses to pursue its statutory  dual-mandate goals of maximum employment  and price stability. A key component of the  review was a series of public Fed Listens events  aimed at consulting with a broad range of  stakeholders in the U.S. economy on issues  pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives. Special Topics Disparities in job loss during the pandemic. The deterioration in labor market conditions  since February has been sudden, severe, and  widespread. At the same time, workers in  some industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations have experienced  more significant employment declines than  others. Although disparities in labor market  outcomes often arise during recessions, factors  unique to this episode have also contributed  to the recent divergence. Job losses have been  especially severe for those with lower earnings  and for the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among lowwage jobs. Small businesses during the COVID-19 crisis. Small businesses make up nearly half of U.S.  private-sector employment and play key  roles in local communities. The pandemic  poses acute risks to the survival of many  small businesses. Their widespread failure  would adversely alter the economic landscape  of local communities and potentially slow  the economic recovery and future labor  productivity growth. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies  are making aggressive efforts to support small  businesses.  Federal fiscal policy response to COVID-19. While the economic consequences resulting  from the pandemic have been historically  large, the amount of fiscal support that has  been enacted constitutes the fastest and largest  fiscal response to any postwar economic  downturn. The pieces of legislation enacted  since the arrival of the pandemic that have  composed this response are expected to raise  government outlays and reduce tax revenues  by nearly $2 trillion in the current fiscal year.  Policy response to COVID-19 in foreign  economies. Authorities in many foreign  economies have implemented fiscal,  monetary, and regulatory measures to  mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Sizable fiscal packages targeted  the sudden loss of income by firms and  households. Actions by central banks,  including purchases of sovereign and  private bonds, have aimed to restore market  functioning, sustain the provision of credit  to businesses and households during the  pandemic, and support the economic recovery.  Regulatory changes have focused on ensuring  that banks sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to  lend to households and firms.  Domestic Developments The COVID-19 outbreak has led to an  acute weakening in the labor market  since February  In response to the public health crisis caused  by the spread of COVID-19, households,  businesses, and governments took dramatic  measures to slow the spread of the virus. As  a result, many sectors of the economy were  effectively closed from mid-March through  April but have seen some gradual lifting of  restrictions since then. The severity, scope, and  speed of the ensuing downturn in economic  activity have been significantly worse than any  recession since World War II. After posting  strong gains in both January and February,  payroll employment plummeted by an  unprecedented 22 million in March and April  before adding back 2.5 million jobs in May  (figure 1). The unemployment rate jumped to  14.7 percent in April, the highest level since the  Great Depression. In May, the unemployment  rate fell to 13.3 percent, which was almost  10 percentage points above the February level. Although unemployment soared  for all major racial and ethnic groups, the  unemployment rate for Hispanics posted the  largest increase over this period.  Data received since the survey week for payroll  employment in May suggest that job gains  have continued.  Although initial claims for unemployment insurance have remained  high, it is unclear whether these new claims  reflect additional large numbers of layoffs  or that states are clearing their backlogs of  applications. In addition, weekly employment  data from the payroll processor ADP indicate  that rehiring has continued and that payroll  employment will likely move up again in June,  albeit from what remains a very low level. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)— the share of the population that is either  working or actively looking for work—fell  from around 63½ percent early this year  to 60.8 percent in May. The May  LFPR reading was one of the lowest since the  early 1970s.  Poor employment prospects or  concerns about safety in the workplace might  have caused some of the newly unemployed  to exit the labor force or induced others to  refrain from entering.  However, with so much of the labor market shut in and most new  hiring at a standstill, the distinction between  being unemployed and out of the labor  force likely has become especially blurred.  The employment-to-population ratio for  individuals 16 and over—the share of that  segment of the population who are working— combines movements in both unemployment  and labor force participation. This measure  was 51.3 percent in April and 52.8 percent in  May, the lowest readings in the history of this  series, which began in 1948. Wages are likely being held down,  although compositional shifts have  temporarily boosted some wage measures While reliable data are limited, anecdotal  evidence suggests that the economic downturn  is putting downward pressure on wages.  The series on wage growth computed by the  Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which  tracks the median 12-month wage growth  of individuals reporting to the Current  Population Survey, has changed little in  recent months (figure 5).  In contrast,  measures that look at average wage costs have  jumped because of compositional effects,  as COVID-19 mitigation efforts and weaker  demand have disproportionately affected  lower-wage workers and left relatively more  higher-wage workers on payrolls. Indeed,  average hourly earnings from the payroll  survey jumped 6.7 percent over the 12 months  ending in May, largely reflecting this change in  the composition of private payrolls. In the first  quarter, both the employment cost index (ECI)  and compensation per hour, which include  both wages and benefits, posted moderate workers who expect them to be temporary.  Research  has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer fi nancial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations. gains, with neither series reflecting much of the  pandemic’s repercussions. Price inflation has moved significantly lower As measured by the 12-month change in  the price index for personal consumption  expenditures (PCE), inflation was just  0.5 percent in April, compared with 1.6 percent  over the same period a year ag. The  abrupt slowing in total PCE price inflation this  year partly reflects sharp declines in consumer  energy prices that resulted from the collapse in  oil prices. In contrast, food prices have moved  higher despite declines in food commodity  prices, likely reflecting higher demand at retail  grocery stores in combination with pandemic-related supply chain issues. In addition to  the drop in energy prices, the unprecedented  reductions in demand for some services as a  result of social distancing have led to sharp  drops in prices for airfares and lodging away  from home. These price declines led the  12-month measure of core PCE inflation—that  is, inflation excluding volatile consumer food  and energy prices—to move significantly lower,  falling from 1.8 percent in February to just  1.0 percent in April, as the monthly readings  for March and April were exceptionally  low. An appreciation of the dollar has also  contributed to the slowing in core inflation.  The trimmed mean measure of PCE price  inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Dallas provides an alternative way  to purge measured inflation of transitory  influences, and it is less sensitive than the core  measure to extreme price movements such  as the recent outsized swings in airfares and  lodging.  The 12-month change in this measure edged down to 1.9 percent in April from  2.1 percent in February. Oil prices are notably lower this spring Against the backdrop of a global collapse  in the demand for oil and a rapid increase in  oil inventories, the Brent price of crude oil  plunged from about $65 per barrel in early  January to around $20 per barrel at the end  of April.   More recently, prices  have rebounded to about $40 per barrel, as  an agreement between OPEC (Organization  of the Petroleum Exporting Countries)  and Russia to cut oil production by nearly  10 percent of global output appears to have  taken effect. Additionally, the dramatic  downturn in global oil demand appears to  be abating as countries begin to ease their  COVID-19 lockdown policies. The decline  in oil prices has contributed to similar  movements in retail gasoline prices, which have  also fallen in recent months. Reported prices of imports other than  energy fell After rising early this year, nonfuel import  prices fell in April, as the dollar appreciated  and the sharp decline in global demand put  downward pressure on non-oil commodity  prices—a substantial component of nonfuel  import prices. Prices of industrial  metals fell sharply in the first months of the  year but edged up in May, as economic activity  in some economies began to revive. However, survey-based measures of  long-run inflation expectations have been  broadly stable . . .  Despite the tumultuous situation of recent  months, survey-based measures of inflation  expectations at medium- and longer-term  horizons, which likely influence actual  inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting  decisions, so far have changed little.  In the University of Michigan Surveys of  Consumers, the median value for inflation  expectations over the next 5 to 10 years was  2.7 percent in May and has fluctuated around  2½ percent since the end of 2016. In the  Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted  by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,  the median of respondents’ expected inflation  rate three years ahead moved lower, on net, in  the second half of last year and has averaged  2.5 percent since. In the Survey of Professional  Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation  for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price  index over the next 10 years edged down to  1.9 percent in the second-quarter survey, below  the 2 percent level that had been reported for  some time. . . . but market-based measures of  inflation compensation are notably lower Market-based measures of inflation  compensation can also be used to make  inferences about inflation expectations.  However, the inference is not straightforward  because market-based measures can be  importantly affected by changes in premiums  that provide compensation for bearing  inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of  longer-term inflation compensation—derived  either from differences between yields on  nominal Treasury securities and those on  comparable-maturity Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation  swaps—have decreased, on net, since the  end of 2019. The 5-year and  5-to-10-year-forward measures of inflation  compensation are about 60 basis points and  40 basis points lower, respectively, than at the beginning of the year.  Both measures dropped  sharply in March, with the 5-year measure  reaching the lowest level since the Global  Financial Crisis and the 5-to-10-year measure  hitting new historical lows. These declines  partly reflected a reduction in the relative  liquidity of TIPS compared with nominal  Treasury securities. As liquidity improved,  inflation compensation partially retraced. The  TIPS-based measure of 5-to-10-year-forward  inflation compensation and the analogous  measure from inflation swaps are now about  1½ percent and 1¾ percent, respectively. Real gross domestic product has  contracted severely and with  unprecedented speed  After posting a moderate gain in 2019, real  gross domestic product (GDP) fell at an  annual rate of 5 percent in the first quarter,  with that decline likely all occurring in the final  weeks of the quarter (figure 11). In the second  quarter, real GDP appears to be plummeting at  a breathtaking pace. Indeed, many professional  forecasters are projecting second-quarter  real GDP to fall at an annual rate of 30 to  40 percent. This severe contraction reflects a  steep drop in consumer spending associated  with measures to contain the spreading virus.  Uncertainty about the economic outlook  also likely has pushed down business fixed  investment, and events abroad have led to a  steep drop in exports. In the manufacturing  sector, output fell sharply in March and posted  its largest decline on record in April as many  factories closed temporarily for all or most of both months. This decrease in factory output  included nearly all motor vehicle and civilian  aircraft manufacturers. However, amid some  easing of restrictions, there are signs that  manufacturing activity moved up in May,  partly as a result of the ramp-up in automotive  production. Social distancing has led to a dramatic  plunge in household spending and  earnings  After having increased at a solid 2.7 percent  pace in 2019, real PCE fell at an annual rate  of 6.8 percent in the first quarter of 2020, one  of the largest quarterly drops in the history  of this series. As concerns about  the virus outbreak grew and government  restrictions mounted, real PCE collapsed,  falling 6.7 percent in March and a record  13.2 percent in April. Although indicators  point to an increase in May—which is  consistent with some relaxation of government  restrictions—taken together, the April data  and May indicators point to an unprecedented  decline in second-quarter consumer outlays.  Real disposable personal income (DPI), a  measure of households’ after-tax purchasing  power, fell in the first quarter, mostly because  of a drop in household income from wages  and salaries. However, in April, real DPI  jumped 13½ percent, pushing its April level  up relative to the fourth quarter at an annual  rate of more than 30 percent. Although  aggregate earnings from employment  collapsed in April, this income loss was more  than offset by government income support  from unemployment insurance and stimulus  payments.12 With households unwilling or  unable to spend a commensurate amount of  their available aggregate income, the April  saving rate shot up to 33 percent. Consumer sentiment has tumbled . . . Households’ concerns about their economic  situation, as reflected in consumer sentiment,  may be leading them to save more for  precautionary reasons. The University of  Michigan Surveys of Consumers index of  consumer sentiment dropped almost 29 points  between February and May, with  declines in both the current and expected  conditions indexes. The Conference Board  survey measure in May also was down sharply  from February, with respondents similarly  grim about current prospects but somewhat  more upbeat than in the Michigan survey  about future conditions.  . . . and overall household wealth fell in  the first quarter  In the first quarter, the ratio of aggregate  household net worth to household income  fell, driven by sharp declines in equity prices. House prices—which tend to  respond to economic developments more  slowly than equity prices and are of particular  importance for the value of assets held by a  large portion of households—continued to  increase in the first quarter and moved up  further in April. Since March,  equity prices have posted sizable gains but are  still below their February peak.  Consumer lending standards have  become less accommodative, but credit  is still available to households with strong  credit profiles  Since the onset of the pandemic, consumer  lending standards have become less  accommodative on balance. Borrowing  conditions are tight for individuals with low  credit ratings, but credit remains available to  those with strong credit profiles. Nevertheless,  consumer borrowing has fallen as spending  has slumped. While banks have  tightened lending standards on credit card and  auto loans, according to the April Senior Loan  Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending  Practices (SLOOS), captive auto lenders have  rolled out generous loan incentives to boost sales. Due to the high cost of servicing  loans in forbearance and uncertainty about  whether borrowers will be able to resume  making payments when the forbearance period  ends, mortgages have become hard to obtain  for borrowers with low credit scores or with  incomes that are difficult to document. Credit  conditions have also tightened significantly for  other higher-risk loans, such as jumbo loans  and cash-out refinances, and the increase in  costs and risks associated with originating  mortgages has raised primary mortgage rates  relative to yields on mortgage-backed securities  (MBS). Nevertheless, mortgage rates currently  have fluctuated around the lowest levels seen in  the past 10 years.  Housing-sector activity has fallen sharply  after starting the year on a solid footing . . . After turning up starting around the middle  of 2019 as mortgage rates moved lower, new  home sales, existing home sales, and singlefamily starts and permits have posted outsized  declines beginning in March that are all  close to the largest ever recorded. Similarly, the COVID-19 outbreak  and mitigation efforts have caused households’  perceptions of homebuying conditions and  builders’ ratings of current sales to move down  despite historically low mortgage rates.  . . . and business fixed investment has  tumbled . . .  The pandemic has curtailed business  investment, as many investment projects were  delayed or canceled because of lower profit  expectations, concerns about future demand,  reduced credit availability, and uncertainty  about how businesses will operate in the  future. Real business fixed investment—that is,  private expenditures for equipment, structures,  research and development (R&D), and other  intellectual property—contracted at an annual  rate of about 8.0 percent in the first quarter  of 2020, coming off a drop of 0.4 percent  for 2019 as a whol. The decline  was centered in equipment investment as well as in outlays for nonresidential buildings. In  addition, lower oil prices contributed to a drop  in investment in drilling and mining structures.  Investment in intellectual property like  software, R&D, and entertainment originals  recorded a tepid increase in the first quarter  after posting solid gains in 2019. Forwardlooking indicators of business spending, such  as new orders of nondefense capital goods,  excluding the volatile aircraft category, have  plunged recently amid sharply lower business  sentiment and profit expectations from  industry analysts.  . . . while corporate financing conditions  have deteriorated  Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms  were robust early in the year but tumbled  during the global spread of COVID-19. The gross issuance of corporate  bonds in the investment-grade segment was  solid until late February, when it became  intermittent at best as market functioning  deteriorated. Meanwhile, issuance in the  speculative-grade segment was essentially  nonexistent following the broad risk-off  sentiment in the market over the public  health crisis. While investment-grade issuance  recovered at a strong pace following the  March Federal Reserve announcement on  corporate credit funding facilities, high-yield  issuance began to pick up only after the  April announcement to expand the facilities  to include support for some recent “fallen  angels”—bonds downgraded to a speculative grade credit rating from an investment-grade  rating because of declining credit quality— and high-yield exchange-traded funds. The  solvency outlook of corporate bonds for  both the investment- and speculative-grade  segments of the market dropped over the first half of the year as the pace of downgrades  intensified and the volume of defaults picked  up. Furthermore, the monthly volume of  fallen angels reached a record high in March,  and market analysts forecast this trend to  continue with a record annual volume of  debt being downgraded to high yield this  year amid declining earnings and elevated  leverage. Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury securities  have widened substantially amid worsening  credit conditions. Institutional leveraged  loan issuance volume was robust to start the  first quarter, but it subsequently came to a  standstill in March because of the pandemic.  Newly launched volume increased somewhat  starting in April but remains at subdued  levels. Banks tightened standards and terms  significantly on commercial and industrial  (C&I) loans, according to respondents to  the April SLOOS, and demand for C&I  loans strengthened amid concerns about the  pandemic. C&I loan growth at banks has  picked up in the first half of the year, largely  driven by soaring credit-line drawdowns  since the beginning of March, as firms with  existing credit lines sought to increase their  internal cash buffers, and by lending to smaller  businesses through the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) since April. Both exports and imports declined  sharply in the first quarter The sudden drop in global demand and  production and stifled global value chains took  a toll on international trade. U.S. real exports  of goods and services in the first quarter  declined at an annual rate of nearly 9 percent,  as exports of services—including travel to  the United States—plunged. Real  imports fell just over 15 percent, as U.S.  consumers and firms cut back on spending,  travel abroad halted, and shipments of  imported goods were delayed. The trade deficit, relative to GDP, narrowed in the first  quarter compared with 2019. Federal fiscal stimulus will provide  substantial support to economic activity  in 2020 while also significantly boosting  the budget deficit and debt . . . Federal fiscal policy measures enacted in  response to the pandemic have provided  income support for households and businesses;  increased grants-in-aid to state and local  governments; and facilitated loans to  businesses, households, states, and localities.  The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)  projects that in fiscal year 2020, the additional  federal government expenditures and foregone  revenues from these policies will total more  than $2 trillion, around 10 percent of nominal  GDP.16 (For a more detailed discussion of  these policies, see the box “Federal Fiscal  Policy Response to COVID-19.”) In addition,  the decline in economic activity has pushed  down tax collections while pushing up outlays  for certain transfer programs—most notably  for unemployment insurance and Medicaid. These tax decreases and transfer increases, working in tandem with the  discretionary stimulus, will support aggregate  demand and help blunt the extent of the  economic downturn.  The combination of the discretionary stimulus  measures and the response of receipts and  expenditures to the decline in economic  activity—referred to as automatic stabilizers— are expected to cause the budget deficit to  balloon from its already elevated level. The  CBO expects the federal unified budget deficit  to widen from 4½ percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2019 to 18 percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2020, the largest annual deficit as a  share of GDP in the post–World War II era. The ratio of federal debt held by the public  to nominal GDP is expected to rise from  79 percent in fiscal 2019 to 101 percent by the  end of fiscal 2020, the highest debt-to-GDP  ratio since 1947. . . . and state and local governments  confront a fiscal crisis as tax  revenue shrinks A sharp reduction in tax revenues due to  a collapse in income and retail sales tax  revenue is placing significant stress on state  governments. Local governments, which rely  on more cyclically stable property taxes, will be  somewhat less directly affected. Nevertheless,  local governments rely on aid from their  state governments, particularly for primary  and secondary education, and the budget  strains at the state level will therefore likely be  passed down to localities. In April and May,  state and local governments shed more than  1½ million jobs as schools and universities  closed early and local governments reduced  their noneducation workforce. These state  and local budget strains will be partially offset  by grants from the federal government. (See  the box “Federal Fiscal Policy Response to  COVID-19” for further details.) Risks to the outlook are greater than usual The path ahead is extraordinarily uncertain.  First and foremost, the pace of recovery will  ultimately depend on the evolution of the  COVID-19 outbreak in the United States  and abroad and the measures undertaken to  contain it. Importantly, some small businesses  and highly leveraged firms might have to shut  down permanently or declare bankruptcy,  which could have longer-lasting repercussions  on productive capacity. (For a more in-depth  discussion of the potential consequences of  the shutdowns on small businesses, see the  box “Small Businesses during the COVID-19  Crisis.”) In addition, there is uncertainty about  future labor demand and productivity as firms  shift their production processes to increase  worker safety, realign their supply chains,  or move services online. Furthermore, if  employees are not called back to their former  jobs, their period of unemployment could  increase, potentially leading to lower wages  when they do eventually find a job. Finally,  applications for employer identification  numbers, which are an early indicator of new  business formations, are tracking well below  levels from recent years and may suggest a  slower pace of future job creation through  this channel.  Financial Developments The expected path of the federal funds  rate over the next several years has fallen  to near zero The expected path of the federal funds rate  over the next several years has declined since  early January and is now flat at the effective  lower bound for the next few years.  Before the Federal Reserve lowered the  target range for the federal funds rate to 0  to ¼ percent in March, policy expectations  dropped substantially in late February  and early March as COVID-19 concerns  intensified. Market-based measures suggest  that the expected federal funds rate remains  below 0.25 percent through mid-2023.18 Survey-based measures of the expected path  of the policy rate also moved down from the  levels observed at the end of 2019. According  to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers  and Survey of Market Participants, both  conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York in April, the median of respondents’  modal projections implies a flat trajectory for  the target range of the federal funds rate at the  effective lower bound for the next few years. The U.S. nominal Treasury yield curve has  shifted down sharply . . . After moving lower over the second half of  2019, nominal Treasury yields fell sharply in  late February and early March as investors’  concerns regarding the implications of  the COVID-19 outbreak for the economic  outlook led to both falling policy expectations  and flight-to-safety flows, with longer term Treasury security yields dropping to  historically low levels. Longer term yields increased moderately and realized  volatility spiked for a period in March as  selling pressures grew, leading to dealer  balance sheet capacity constraints and  impaired trading conditions, before falling  back again after the Federal Reserve’s actions  helped restore smooth market functioning.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and  MBS Markets” in Part 2 for a more detailed  description of the Treasury market during  March.) More recently, yields on longer-term  Treasury securities rose somewhat, linked at  least partially to the expected increase in the  issuance of longer-term Treasury securities  as well as some improvement in investor  sentiment. Options prices suggest that near term uncertainty about longer-dated Treasury  yields rose sharply in March to levels not  seen since the Global Financial Crisis before  retracing. . . . but spreads of other long-term debt  to Treasury securities rose  Yields on 30-year agency MBS—an important  determinant of mortgage interest rates— decreased somewhat, on balance, though less  than the yields on nominal Treasury securities,  since the start of the year and remained very  low by historical standards.  Early in the year, yields on both investment and speculative-grade corporate bonds as  well as primary- and secondary-market  municipal bonds were near record lows.  Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury yields  were in the lower end of their historical  distribution. Since mid-February, corporate  spreads have increased appreciably as market  functioning deteriorated and credit quality  declined. In March, spreads to comparable maturity Treasury securities increased sharply  for corporate debt but remained below those  observed during the 2008 Global Financial  Crisis. Spreads started to normalize following  the Federal Reserve announcements of  corporate bond facilities in late March,  particularly for investment-grade corporate  debt, but remain higher than at the end  of 2019. Similarly, yields and spreads for  municipal debt rose strikingly in March, with  spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury  securities spiking to their highest level since the  Global Financial Crisis as market functioning  declined and concerns about municipal  credit quality arose. Yields on municipal debt  partially recovered following Federal Reserve  announcements in late March and April of  support to municipal debt markets through  liquidity facilities.  Liquidity in markets for Treasury  securities and mortgage-backed securities  deteriorated sharply before recovering  following various Federal Reserve actions A number of indicators of Treasury market  functioning—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, estimates of transaction costs, and  measures of market depth—deteriorated  significantly in late February and March, but  conditions improved considerably following  Federal Reserve asset purchases and the  creation of credit and liquidity facilities. Bid-ask spreads remain  higher than those seen at the end of the year  in the off-the-run market and for the 30-year  bond in the on-the-run market, and market  depth remains low. MBS spreads have fallen  back markedly, but prepayment risk and  uncertainty about forbearance continue to put  upward pressure on spreads. Strains remain in  some less liquid parts of the market.  Broad equity prices dropped notably  amid the global spread of COVID-19  before rebounding  Equity prices continued to increase early in the  year before tumbling in March, dropping as  much as 34 percent from peak to trough. Prices  have mostly recovered against a background  of unprecedented, forceful, and rapid  monetary and fiscal policy responses as well  as recent tentative signs of economic revival  associated with the easing of restrictions and  in the face of bleak forecasts for U.S. firms’  earnings in 2020. The decline in  stock prices was widespread across all sectors,  with the largest declines in the energy and  banking sectors. Measures of implied and  realized stock price volatility for the S&P  500 index—the VIX and the 20-day realized  volatility—spiked to levels that were most  recently observed during the financial crisis.  They have since retraced much of  that increase but remain at elevated levels. (For  a discussion of financial stability issues, see  the box “Developments Related to Financial  Stability.”) While overnight money market rates  generally moved down in line with  decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s target range, short-term  funding markets experienced strains  before the announcement and launch of  Federal Reserve facilities Decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s (FOMC) target range for the  federal funds rate in March transmitted  effectively through overnight money markets,  with yields on a broad set of money market  instruments moving lower in response to  the FOMC’s policy actions. Over the first  half of the year, the effective federal funds  rate (EFFR) remained within the target  range. After printing at the top  of the target range for a few days following  the March 15 rate cut, the EFFR softened  considerably to trade near the bottom of the  range amid substantial increases in reserves.  Though upward pressures on interest rates  in overnight money markets were generally  well contained during March, short-term  funding markets experienced a liquidity  squeeze. Certain other short-term interest  rates, including those pertaining to commercial  paper and negotiable certificates of deposit,  moved up markedly. However, since the  announcement and launch of the Federal  Reserve liquidity facilities directed toward  these markets, short-term funding rates have  declined significantly.  Bank credit continued to expand, while  bank profitability declined Aggregate credit provided by commercial  banks trended up through the first half of  2020, driven largely by soaring C&I credit line drawdowns since early March and by  loans originated under the PPP since April.  While commercial real estate loan  growth remained strong, growth in residential  real estate loans on banks’ balance sheets has  slowed since the beginning of the year, and  outstanding consumer loans contracted in April. First-quarter earnings reports of larger  banks indicate that bank profitability declined  considerably in the first quarter of 2020  because of narrower net interest margins and  notable increases in loan loss provisions.20 International Developments  Economic activity abroad plunged in the  first half of the year The spread of COVID-19 throughout the  world and the measures taken to contain it  have produced devastating effects on the global  economy. Many countries closed nonessential  businesses and restricted people’s movement  during the first months of the year, leading  to a sharp global economic contraction.  Foreign GDP declined at about a 13 percent  annualized rate in the first quarter, and recent  indicators point to an even larger contraction  in the second quarter. Available  data suggest that the decline in foreign activity  in the first half of the year has been greater  than during the Global Financial Crisis. The collapse in economic activity across  countries followed the progression of the  virus. In China, where regions underwent  strict lockdowns as early as January, GDP  in the first quarter dropped at a stunning  36 percent annualized rate. As the  virus spread to Europe, many countries in  the region imposed strict social-distancing  restrictions; euro-area GDP contracted nearly  14 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The  substantial decline in commodity prices also  depressed activity of commodity exporters  such as Canada and several Latin American  countries. Recent data indicate that Chinese  production began to revive in the spring,  as infection rates fell and restrictions were gradually lifted. Indicators of  Chinese consumption, however, remain weak.  A number of advanced foreign economies  (AFEs) began to relax social-distancing  restraints in recent weeks. Labor market conditions deteriorated and  inflation fell . . . Amid widespread business closures and  collapsing demand, labor market conditions  abroad have deteriorated sharply in recent  months, albeit with differences across  countries. Several European and Asian  countries have thus far experienced sizable  declines in hours worked but relatively small  increases in unemployment given the size  of the drop in economic activity, partly  reflecting direct wage subsidies provided by the  governments to keep workers on firms’ payrolls.  In other countries, unemployment  rates increased markedly.  Although the shutdowns across the world  have reduced the global supply of goods and  services, the depressive effects on demand of  lower income, social distancing, and increased  uncertainty have predominated, driving down  inflation in the foreign economies. In several  AFEs, recent inflation readings have been well  below central bank targets, reflecting large  declines in energy prices as well as subdued  core inflation. . . . prompting swift and substantial  policy responses Foreign fiscal authorities have aimed to fill  income gaps resulting from businesses closing  and workers staying home. Many national  governments acted decisively to support firms’  balance sheets through tax deferrals, loans,  and loan guarantees; to encourage firms to  retain workers through wage subsidies; and to  support household spending through enhanced  unemployment benefits and cash transfers.  In addition, many foreign central banks  reduced their policy rates, initiated or  enhanced credit facilities, and relaxed capital requirements for financial institutions.  Several AFE central banks also ramped  up asset purchase programs to alleviate  liquidity strains in their domestic capital  markets. Some emerging market economy  (EME) central banks followed suit. See  the box “Policy Response to COVID-19 in  Foreign Economies” for a more detailed  discussion of fiscal and monetary policies  implemented abroad. Downside risks remain high Despite aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy actions, risks abroad are skewed to  the downside. The future progression of the  pandemic remains highly uncertain, with  resurgence of the outbreak a substantial  risk. In addition, the economic damage of  the recession may be quite persistent. The  collapse in demand may ultimately bankrupt  many businesses, thereby reducing business  dynamism and innovation. Unlike past  recessions, services activity has dropped  more sharply than manufacturing—with  restrictions on movement severely curtailing  expenditures on travel, tourism, restaurants,  and recreation—and social-distancing  requirements and attitudes may further weigh  on the recovery in these sectors. Disruptions  to global trade may also result in a costly  reconfiguration of global supply chains.  Persistently weak consumer and firm demand  may push medium- and longer-term inflation  expectations well below central bank targets,  particularly in regions with already low  inflation at the onset of the recession. Finally,  additional expansionary fiscal policies— possibly in response to future large-scale  outbreaks of COVID-19—could significantly  increase government debt and add to sovereign  risk, especially for countries with already  limited fiscal space.  Financial conditions abroad tightened,  especially in some emerging market  economies The precipitous spread of COVID-19 in the  first months of the year weighed heavily on global risk sentiment, and many financial  markets suffered from severe illiquidity.  Aggressive fiscal and monetary policy  responses in the United States and abroad,  however, helped boost sentiment and improve  market functioning, contributing to a partial  retracement. On net, financial conditions  abroad remain tighter than at the beginning of  the year, especially in some EMEs.  Financial conditions in the AFEs largely  tracked financial market developments in the  United States. Major AFE equity indexes  dropped substantially as news about the spread  of COVID-19 and the associated measures  to contain it were reported, but those indexes  rebounded following the announcement of  extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy  actions and, more recently, tentative signs  of economic stabilization.  Notwithstanding temporary increases due to  poor market functioning, long-term sovereign  yields in major advanced economies fell, on  net, as flight-to-safety demand surged, policy  rates reached their effective lower bounds in  several countries, and expectations of future  policy rates declined markedly.  Sovereign interest rates for economies in the  euro-area periphery were sensitive to news  about the size and form of European-wide  fiscal support for the recovery and, on net,  remain a bit higher than at the beginning of  the year. In recent months, Fitch  and DBRS Morningstar downgraded Italy’s  long-term debt ratings. Financial conditions in some EMEs tightened,  especially in Latin American countries. Equity  indexes suffered widespread losses early in  the year, and rebounds since then have been  uneven across countries. While equity indexes  in emerging Asia partially recovered, Mexican  and Brazilian equity indexes underperformed  other EME equities. In March,  borrowing rates for corporations increased  to levels not seen since the Global Financial  Crisis, although they have subsequently  declined somewhat. In the first half of the  year, funds dedicated to investing in EMEs experienced outflows, and sovereign borrowing  spreads increased sharply before moving down  more recently. The tightening in  some EME financial conditions appears to  reflect investors’ preference for safe and liquid  assets; a reduced confidence in the ability  of some governments to contain the health  crisis; and heightened uncertainty about the  prospects for EME public finances, commodity  prices, and global trade. The dollar appreciated The foreign exchange value of the dollar  increased nearly 5 percent since the start of  the year, as the boost from safe-haven demand  outweighed the effects of lower U.S. interest  rates. On a trade-weighted basis,  the dollar increased about 1.5 percent against  AFE currencies and 7 percent against EME  currencies. The Mexican peso and Brazilian  real depreciated about 16 percent and  30 percent, respectively, partly in response to  lower commodity prices. The Chinese renminbi  fluctuated largely in response to news about  the outbreak and policy actions of Chinese  authorities and, on net, depreciated slightly  since the beginning of the year. The Federal Open Market Committee  quickly reduced the federal funds rate to  the effective lower bound . . . In light of the effects of COVID-19 on the  economy and on risks to the outlook, the  Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate by a total of 1½ percentage points—from  a range of 1½ to 1¾ percent to one of 0 to  ¼ percent—over two meetings in early and  mid-March.21 Specifically, in early  March, the Committee lowered the target  range for the federal funds rate ½ percentage  point, to 1 to 1¼ percent. In mid-March, the  Committee further lowered the target range  1 percentage point, to 0 to ¼ percent. The  Committee expects to maintain this target  range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to  achieve its maximum-employment and price stability goals. In connection with the changes  in the target range, the Federal Reserve  reduced the interest paid on reserve balances  and decreased the interest rate offered on  overnight reverse repurchase agreements at the  two March meetings. . . . and the FOMC increased the holdings  of Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities in the System  Open Market Account At its mid-March meeting, along with its  decision to lower the target range for the  federal funds rate, the FOMC emphasized  that it is prepared to use its full range of tools  to support the flow of credit to households  and businesses, thereby promoting its  maximum-employment and price-stability  goals. To support the smooth functioning of  markets for Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—markets  central to the flow of credit to households and businesses—the Committee announced  that it would increase its holdings of  Treasury securities by at least $500 billion  and its holdings of agency MBS by at least  $200 billion over coming months.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury  and MBS Markets.”) Later in March,  the Committee announced that it would  continue to purchase Treasury securities  and agency MBS in the amounts needed to  support smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy to  broader financial condition. The  Committee also included agency commercial  MBS in its purchases for the first time. In  June, the Committee announced that, over  coming months, the Federal Reserve will  increase its holdings of Treasury securities  and agency residential and commercial MBS  at least at the current pace to sustain smooth  market functioning, thereby fostering effective  transmission of monetary policy to broader  financial conditions.  The Federal Reserve has continued rolling  over at auction all principal payments from its  holdings of Treasury securities. Before mid-March, to allow for a gradual runoff  of agency securities, the Federal Reserve  reinvested principal payments from agency  debt and agency MBS of up to $20 billion per  month in Treasury securities; agency MBS  principal payments in excess of $20 billion  each month were reinvested in agency MBS.  Beginning in mid-March, the Committee  announced it would reinvest all principal  payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings  of agency debt and agency MBS back into  agency MBS. (The box “Developments on the  Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” discusses  changes in the size and composition of the  Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the  past year.) The Federal Reserve eased lending terms  for primary credit borrowing . . . Primary credit is the Federal Reserve lending  program available to depository institutions  in generally sound financial condition. Amid  increasing stress in funding markets in midMarch, the Federal Reserve announced  several changes to the primary credit program.  Importantly, the primary credit rate was set at  the top of the target range for the federal funds  rate rather than 50 basis points above the top  of the range. The term of primary credit loans,  which had previously been mainly overnight  advances, was extended to allow depository  institutions to borrow for up to 90 days.  Federal Reserve communication encouraged  the use of the discount window to help meet  the demand for credit from households and  businesses. Discount window borrowing under the  primary credit program increased significantly  following these developments. Primary  credit outstanding reached a peak of around  $50 billion in late March 2020—its highest  level since the financial crisis and well above  the typical level of around $10 million that  prevailed in 2019. Use of primary credit was  fairly widespread, with discount window loans  being extended to institutions across a range  of size categories. Overall, the outstanding  amount of primary credit loans declined to  about $10 billion by early June. . . . and undertook actions with other  central banks to support U.S. dollar  funding markets The Federal Reserve announced coordinated  actions with other central banks to enhance  the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  the establishment of temporary U.S. dollar  liquidity arrangements (swap lines) with  nine additional central banks.  The size of the swap lines  increased from close to zero in mid-March to  almost $450 billion by the end of April. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repo facility for foreign and international  monetary authorities. The FOMC is committed to using its tools  to promote maximum employment and  price stability The ongoing public health crisis will weigh  heavily on economic activity, employment,  and inflation in the near term and pose  considerable risks to the economic outlook  over the medium term. The FOMC is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price-stability goals. The  Committee will continue to monitor the  implications of incoming information for the  economic outlook, including information  related to public health, as well as global  developments and muted inflation pressures,  and it will use its tools and act as appropriate  to support the economy. The Federal Reserve has continued  to review its strategic framework for  monetary policy In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad  review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to  pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of  maximum employment and price stability. A  key component of the review was a series of  public Fed Listens events. The Federal Reserve  held 14 events around the country in 2019 to  consult with a range of organizations on the  effects that labor market conditions, inflation,  and interest rates have on them and their  communities. In light of the rapidly changing  public health and economic environments due  to COVID-19, the Federal Reserve convened  another event in May 2020 to get an update.  The Federal Reserve has released a report on  its Fed Listens initiative. The lessons learned from the Fed Listens initiative were never more  important than they are today as Americans  navigate through these challenging times.  The Federal Reserve expects to complete  the review of its monetary policy strategy,  tools, and communication practices later this  year. The Federal Reserve remains focused  on the attainment of its goals of maximum  employment and price stability, including  laying the foundation for the return to a strong  labor market. Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open  Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held  on June 9–10, 2020, meeting participants  submitted their projections of the most likely  outcomes for real gross domestic product  (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and  inflation for each year from 2020 through 2022  and over the longer run. Each participant’s  projections were based on information  available at the time of the meeting, together  with his or her assessment of appropriate  monetary policy and assumptions about other  factors likely to affect economic outcomes.  The longer-run projections represent each  participant’s assessment of the value to which  each variable would be expected to converge,  over time, under appropriate monetary policy  and in the absence of further shocks to the  economy. “Appropriate monetary policy”  is defined as the future path of policy  that each participant deems most likely to  foster outcomes for economic activity  and inflation that best satisfy his or her  individual interpretation of the Federal  Reserve’s congressionally mandated goals of  promoting maximum employment and  price stability. All participants judged that the uncertainty  attending their projections was higher than  the average of the past 20 years. The median  of participants’ projections for real GDP  growth was negative 6.5 percent for 2020,  with individual projections ranging from  negative 10.0 to negative 4.2 percent. The median of projections for  real GDP growth was 5.0 percent for 2021 and  3.5 percent for 2022. The median assessment  of real GDP growth in the longer run was  1.8 percent, down 0.1 percentage point since  the December 2019 projections included in the  February 2020 Monetary Policy Report. The median of projections for the  unemployment rate in the fourth quarter  of 2020 was 9.3 percent, with individual  projections ranging from 7.0 to 14.0 percent.  The median of projections for the  unemployment rate was 6.5 percent and  5.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2021 and  2022, respectively. These values are above the  median assessment of the longer-run normal  unemployment rate, 4.1 percent, which was  unchanged from December. The median of projections for inflation, as  measured by changes in the price index for  personal consumption expenditures (PCE),  was 0.8 percent for 2020, 1.6 percent for  2021, and 1.7 percent for 2022. Almost all  participants expected inflation to run below  the Committee’s longer-run objective of  2 percent through 2022. The medians of  projections for core PCE inflation were  1.0 percent for this year, 1.5 percent for 2021,  and 1.7 percent for 2022. With regard to participants’ projections  of appropriate monetary policy, almost  all participants expected to maintain the  target range for the federal funds rate at  0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of  2022. These projections represent  participants’ individual assessments of  appropriate policy consistent with their  projections of economic growth, employment,  inflation, and other factors. However, the  economic outlook is inherently uncertain; thus,  each participant’s assessment of appropriate  policy is also necessarily uncertain and will  change in response to changes to the economic  outlook and associated risks. The median  estimate of the longer-run level for the federal  funds rate, 2.5 percent, was unchanged from  December. A more complete description of the Summary of  Economic Projections will be released with the  minutes of the June 9–10, 2020, FOMC meeting  on July 1. Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic For nearly all industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations, employment was substantially  lower in May than in February. While job loss has been  pervasive, some groups have experienced more severe  employment declines than others, particularly workers  with lower earnings and the socioeconomic groups that  are disproportionately represented among low-wage  jobs; employment declines have also been larger in  some states than in others. Although disparities in labor  market outcomes across groups often widen during  recessions, certain factors unique to this episode—in  particular, the social-distancing measures taken by  households, businesses, and governments to limit  in-person interactions—have contributed to the recent  divergence. Because jobs differ in the degree to which they  involve personal contact and physical proximity, in  whether they provide an “essential function,” and in  whether their business operations can be conducted  remotely, social-distancing measures have had  disparate consequences across industries and, in  turn, on particular types of workers who tend to work  in heavily affected industries. For example, the net  proportion of jobs lost since February has been greater  in industries such as accommodation and food services  (where social-distancing regulations have severely  affected many businesses and where workers are  frequently unable to work from home) and smaller in  industries such as professional and business services  and financial activities (where workers may be less  affected by social distancing and are generally more  able to conduct work from home).  In keeping with this  pattern, states that rely heavily on tourism—such as  Hawaii and Nevada—saw exceptionally large increases  in unemployment through April (the most recent month  for which state unemployment rate data are available). Net job loss since February thus far has been  concentrated in lower-wage industries, suggesting that  employment declines have been disproportionately large among lower-paid workers who may be less  able to financially weather an extended period of  unemployment. Indeed, estimates of employment  declines based on a worker’s previous wage (using data  from the payroll provider ADP), shown in figure A, also  indicate this disproportionate pattern of job loss. From  February to mid-April, employment fell substantially  more for workers who were previously earning wages  in the bottom fourth of wage earners, compared with  other workers. Despite somewhat more rapid job  growth for lower-wage earners in subsequent weeks,  employment for lower-wage earners remains roughly  35 percent lower than in February, compared with  5 to 15 percent lower employment for higher-wage  earners. These differences are also consistent with  results from a recent survey conducted by the Federal  Reserve Board that indicated that among households  with an annual income of $40,000 or less, nearly  40 percent of individuals who were employed in  February experienced job loss in March or early April,  compared with 20 percent of the population overall. Figure B illustrates that the decline in employment  (as a fraction of the population) has also been especially  large for people aged 16 to 24 compared with older  workers, for people without a bachelor’s degree  compared with those with at least a bachelor’s degree,  and for Hispanics compared with other races and  ethnicities. In addition, employment rates have dropped  somewhat more for women than for men, and for  Asians and African Americans compared with whites. In  general, the groups with the larger employment declines  are most commonly employed in the industries that have  experienced the greatest net employment declines thus  far, such as accommodation, food service, and retail  trade; these demographic groups are also less likely to  report being able to work from home. In the months ahead, labor market prospects for the  unemployed and underemployed—both overall and  for particularly hard-hit groups of workers—will largely  depend on the course of the COVID-19 outbreak  itself and on actions taken to halt its spread. Recent  job losses differ from those of previous recessions  not only in the suddenness and severity with which  they occurred, but also in the unusually high share of workers who expect them to be temporary. Research has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer financial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations. Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19 In response to the immense health and economic  consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal  lawmakers have enacted a variety of measures. These  measures are expected to raise government outlays and  reduce tax revenues—the sum of which we refer to as  fiscal support—by nearly $2½ trillion over 10 years, of  which about $2 trillion is expected in the current fiscal  year, according to the Congressional Budget Office  (CBO). The legislation also included  $454 billion for the Department of the Treasury to fund  lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve  and $46 billion to provide loans to the airline industry.1 Consistent with the historically large economic  consequences resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic,  the amount of fiscal support that has been enacted  constitutes the fastest and largest fiscal response to any  postwar economic downturn. Figure B breaks down the estimated fiscal support  for fiscal year 2020 into four broad  categories: (1) direct aid to households, (2) loans or  grants to small businesses, (3) other aid to businesses,  and (4) government purchases of goods and services or  grants to state and local governments. The rest of this discussion provides a brief overview  of the main components of the four stimulus bills,  focusing on the CBO’s estimate of fi scal support  (increased outlays minus reduced tax revenues) for  fi scal 2020, organized by the four categories assigned  in the fi gure. Direct Aid to Households: $740 billion The largest component of income support is roughly  $290 billion in one-time payments to households.  These stimulus checks provide households with a  one-time refundable tax credit of $1,200 per adult  and $500 per child 16 and under, with a phaseout  at incomes between $75,000 and $100,000 for  individuals and between $150,000 and $200,000  for couples. By the end of May, according to the Treasury Department, nearly all of the stimulus checks  had been disbursed. The second major piece of  household income support is $230 billion in expanded  unemployment insurance (UI) benefi ts. UI benefi ts  were increased by $600 per week through the end of  July; eligibility was expanded through December for  “gig” workers, the self-employed, and those who are  unable to work as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak;  and benefit durations were extended by 13 weeks  through December. According to the CBO, around  $70 billion in the more generous weekly benefi ts had  been paid through the end of May. The legislation also  provides student loan and mortgage relief, suspending  loan payments and interest accrual on federal student  loans until the end of September and reducing or  suspending mortgage payments for mortgages backed  by government-sponsored enterprises.  Another  component of the legislation provides federally  mandated paid sick leave for workers at employers with fewer than 500 employees. The cost of the sick leave  is rebated to employers through refundable payroll tax  credits, which are expected to total about $90 billion in  fi scal 2020. Employees are entitled to up to two weeks  of paid leave equal to normal earnings for employees or  family members who are directly affected by COVID-19  or COVID-19-related closures; additionally, employees  are entitled to 10 weeks of paid leave at two-thirds  normal pay for those caring for a child whose school  or daycare is closed. In addition, about $90 billion in  tax relief was provided to households in fiscal 2020,  primarily through expanding the deductibility of certain  business losses from individual tax liabilities. Loans and Grants to Small Businesses:  $760 billion The Paycheck Protection Program provides about  $670 billion in support to businesses with fewer than  500 employees through loans of up to 250 percent  of monthly payroll costs before the crisis (subject to  a cap of $10 million). These loans will be forgiven if  employment and compensation are maintained relative  to a pre-crisis level. In addition, small businesses are  supported by about $90 billion in Small Business  Administration (SBA) Economic Injury Disaster Loans and by six-month loan payment deferrals for new and  existing SBA borrowers. Other Aid to Businesses: $420 billion Businesses are aided by several provisions that  reduce tax revenues in fiscal 2020, with the largest  reduction coming from delayed payment of employer side payroll taxes until 2021 and 2022, which is  expected to reduce tax payments by $210 billion in  fiscal 2020 but mostly be made up in subsequent  years. An additional roughly $90 billion reduction  in fi scal 2020 tax liability results from modifi cations  of the treatment of net operating losses and interest  expenses for corporations. The legislation also provides  nearly $50 billion in payroll tax relief for businesses  significantly affected by COVID-19 shutdowns in  order to retain employees. Aside from tax relief,  about $20 billion in loans and grants are expected  to go to passenger and cargo air carriers and related  contractors to support payroll expenses for aviation  workers affected by the pandemic. In addition, about  $50 billion in funds are expected to go to hospitals  to support health-care-related expenses or provide  relief for lost revenues. Finally, while they do not  show up in the CBO’s estimates of fiscal support, the  legislation provided up to $454 billion for the Treasury  Department to fund lending facilities established by  the Federal Reserve to offer loans to businesses as well  as state and local governments and provided up to  $46 billion to offer loans to the airline industry. Direct Government Purchases and Aid to  State and Local Governments: $260 billion The largest part of this aid category consists of  about $150 billion in relief funding to state and local  governments for expenses related to dealing with the  COVID-19 pandemic. State governments will also  receive an extra $30 billion through a temporary  increase in the share of Medicaid expenditures that  the federal government covers. In addition, the Federal  Emergency Management Agency is expected to spend  $50 billion in disaster relief funds to provide assistance  to individuals and organizations affected by the  COVID-19 crisis. Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis Small businesses employ nearly half of U.S. private sector workers, play key roles in local communities,  and provide income to millions of business owners.  The COVID-19 pandemic poses acute risks to the  survival of many small businesses. Widespread failure  of small businesses would create economic insecurity  for millions of workers and business owners, slow  down the economic recovery, and alter the economic  landscape of local communities. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies are making  aggressive efforts to support small businesses. More than 99 percent of U.S. fi rms have fewer than  500 employees, and almost 90 percent have fewer  than 20 employees. Altogether, businesses with fewer  than 500 employees account for almost half of private sector jobs.  Small businesses and small nonprofit  organizations are particularly prevalent in service  industries and include examples such as car dealers,  restaurants, barber shops, medical offices, legal offices,  home repair contractors, and religious organizations.  These businesses and organizations are part of the  economic and social landscape of local communities  and neighborhoods. Small businesses are also prevalent  in manufacturing supply chain industries.  Moreover,  the businesses that spur innovation, contribute to  nationwide job and productivity growth, and turn into  large household names typically start out as small  businesses. Small businesses are particularly vulnerable to social  distancing for two main reasons. First, small businesses  are prevalent in sectors that have seen especially large  declines in revenue due to social distancing; small  businesses make up about 60 percent of employment  in the “leisure and hospitality” sector and about  85 percent of employment in the “other services” sector  (which includes assorted neighborhood fixtures like  churches and beauty salons). Second, small fi rms tend  to be more financially constrained than larger fi rms.  For example, bank account data suggest that roughly  half of small businesses entered the COVID-19 crisis  with cash reserves sufficient for fewer than 15 days of  operations without revenue.  Moreover, even under  normal circumstances, many small fi rms face financial  challenges and lack access to liquid financial markets,  relying instead on bank loans, credit cards, and the  personal resources of owners. A wide variety of data reveal an alarming picture  of small business health during the COVID-19 crisis.  Surveys of small businesses suggest that pessimism  about business viability is prevalent.  The majority of  small businesses have seen revenue losses, and half of small businesses do not expect to return to their usual  level of operations within the next six months. Employment declines have been deeper among  small businesses than among larger businesses.  Moreover, the share of total job losses  accounted for by small businesses stopping paycheck  issuance entirely (that is, going inactive) is substantial.  Data from Homebase, a  provider of scheduling and time sheet services for small  local businesses, show that between 30 and 40 percent  of establishments in sectors deeply affected by social  distancing have gone inactive since February 15.9  Data  from Womply, a provider of credit card transaction  processing services, suggest that spending at small  restaurants was down 80 percent (versus a year earlier)  by early April and was still down 50 percent in early  June. Taken together, these data suggest considerable  risk of failure for a large number of small businesses. The inflow of new businesses (which are typically  small businesses) also plummeted, as shown in  figure B. The Census Bureau reports that, in late March,  applications for new employer business tax identifiers  were down more than 40 percent relative to a year earlier; the series has only gradually recovered and  was still just below last year’s pace as of late May.  Business entry is a key contributor to job creation; with  business exits and associated job destruction likely to  be elevated during the COVID-19 episode, new fi rm  creation is even more important than usual. The Congress, the Federal Reserve, and other federal  agencies have acted swiftly to help address the risk  of widespread small business failure. As part of the  CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic  Security Act), the Congress created the Paycheck  Protection Program (PPP) to provide small businesses  with funds to retain employees for roughly two months.  The Federal Reserve is bolstering the effectiveness  of the PPP through the Paycheck Protection Program  Liquidity Facility, which extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans. About  three-fourths of small businesses with employees have  applied for PPP assistance, suggesting the program  is extremely valuable and timely, and a large share  of these applications have been approved; however,  some industries may face an ongoing need after the  program expires. The Federal Reserve is also supporting lending  to small businesses through the Term Asset-Backed  Securities Loan Facility, which lends to holders of,  among others, securities backed by loans guaranteed  by the Small Business Administration. In addition, the  Federal Reserve has established the Main Street Lending  Program (MSLP), which features a range of facilities  designed to provide support to small and medium sized fi rms.13 Small businesses make vital contributions to labor  markets and their local communities, and a critical  subset of small businesses are young, innovative fi rms  with the potential to create many jobs and increase  overall productivity. The nature of the economic  recovery that follows the COVID-19 crisis will depend  in part on the survival of small businesses. Small  business failures not only destroy jobs, but also erase  the productive knowledge within the fi rms, deplete  the assets of business owners, alter the character of  communities and neighborhoods, and, in some cases,  deprive the country of innovations. The Federal Reserve  will continue to monitor the conditions of small  businesses and support this fundamental segment of  the economy. Developments Related to Financial Stability The COVID-19 pandemic has abruptly halted large  swaths of economic activity and led to swift financial  repercussions. Despite increased resilience from the  financial and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably those  associated with liquidity and maturity transformation  in the nonbank financial sector—have amplified some  of the economic effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected to be  significant in the near term. This discussion reviews  vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system at the  onset of the pandemic and describes some of the  extraordinary measures taken by the Federal Reserve to  mitigate the brunt of the shock. At the onset of the pandemic, asset valuation  pressures in the United States were elevated. Spreads,  risk premiums, and implied volatility were at the low  ends of their historical distributions among several  large asset categories, including domestic equities  and corporate bonds. Beginning in late February,  expectations for global economic growth plummeted  and uncertainty increased sharply, driving down  risky asset prices and putting downward pressure on  Treasury yields. Equity prices plunged as concern over  the COVID-19 outbreak grew and volatility surged to  extreme levels. Trading conditions became impaired  across several markets, posing significant challenges  to price discovery and increasing trading costs.  yields on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened to the highest levels since  the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Leveraged loan  spreads also widened, especially for lower-rated loans.  Since late March, however, investors’ tolerance for  risk increased somewhat following interventions by  the Federal Reserve; subsequently, risky asset prices  partially retraced their course and market functioning  improved. While the data on real estate prices mostly  predate the COVID-19 outbreak, commercial real  estate markets, in particular, had elevated valuation  pressures at the beginning of 2020, making them  vulnerable to significant price declines stemming from  the unfolding effects of the pandemic. On the eve of the pandemic, vulnerabilities  associated with total private-sector debt stood at  a moderate level relative to their historical norms.  However, this assessment masks differences across the  business and household sectors. Household borrowing  advanced more slowly than overall economic activity  and remained heavily concentrated among borrowers  with high credit scores. By contrast, business debt levels were high relative to either business assets  or gross domestic product, with the riskiest fi rms  accounting for most of the increase in debt in recent  years. Against this backdrop, the COVID-19 outbreak  poses severe risks to businesses and millions of  households. For businesses, as economic activity  continues to contract, the related reduction in earnings  and additional debt needed to bridge the downturn  will increase the debt burden and default risk. For  households, the sudden and outsized increase in  unemployment and sharp decline in family incomes  may give rise to widespread delinquencies and defaults. In the financial sector, banks, as of the fourth quarter  of 2019, were well capitalized relative to historical  levels, in part due to the regulatory reforms enacted  after the GFC. To date, banks have been able to meet  surging demand for draws on credit lines while also  building loan loss reserves to absorb higher expected  defaults. Leverage at broker-dealers changed little in  the second half of 2019 and remained at historically  low levels. However, in March, constraints on dealers’  intermediation capacity, including internal risk management practices and regulatory constraints on  the bank holding companies under which many dealers  operate, were cited as possible reasons for deteriorating  liquidity in even usually liquid markets. Leverage at  life insurance companies has reached post-2008 highs.  Moreover, the capitalization of the life insurance sector  is likely to deteriorate in coming quarters because  of lower-than-expected asset valuations and lower  long-term interest rates. Some measures suggest that  hedge fund leverage continued to expand through  the end of 2019. Higher leverage left hedge funds  vulnerable to asset price declines and to the increase in  market volatility accompanying the COVID-19 shock.  The subsequent deleveraging by hedge funds likely  contributed to market dislocations in February  and March. Funding markets proved less fragile than during  the 2007–09 episode in the face of the COVID-19  outbreak and the associated financial market turmoil.  The subdued reliance of large bank holding companies  on short-term funding and their robust holdings of high quality liquid assets have prevented any considerable  stress in the banking sector. Nonetheless, significant  strains emerged and emergency Federal Reserve  actions were required to stabilize short-term funding  markets. Recent growth in prime money market mutual  funds (MMFs) and large holdings of corporate debt by other mutual funds increased the vulnerabilities in  the financial system. These vulnerabilities produced  considerable strains in March as asset prices fell and  investors became more risk averse. Prime MMFs and  bond mutual funds experienced significant outflows  in March, leading to severe strains in markets funded  by these institutions—notably, commercial paper (CP)  and corporate bond markets. The tensions began to  ease only after the Federal Reserve took several actions  targeted at these markets, as will be discussed. The outlook for the pandemic and economic activity  is uncertain. In the near term, risks associated with  the course of COVID-19 and its effects on the U.S.  and global economies remain high. In addition, there  is potential for stresses to interact with preexisting  vulnerabilities stemming from financial system or fiscal  weaknesses in Europe, China, and emerging market  economies. In turn, these risks have the potential  to interact with the vulnerabilities identified in this  discussion and produce additional strains for the U.S.  financial system. Facilities to Support the Economy since the  COVID-19 Outbreak The Federal Reserve, with the approval of the  Secretary of the Treasury, established new credit and  liquidity facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal  Reserve Act to alleviate severe dislocations that arose in  a number of financial markets and to support the flow  of credit to households and businesses.  These actions  fall into two categories: stabilizing short-term funding  markets and providing more direct support for the  extension of credit across the economy. As investors moved rapidly toward cash and the  most liquid assets, an acute liquidity squeeze emerged  in short-term funding markets in mid-March. In the  CP market, funding dried up even for companies in  good financial standing. At the same time, investors  contributed to the stress by starting to pull away from  some prime MMFs, which typically hold CP and other  highly liquid, short-term debt instruments. In response,  the Federal Reserve set up the Commercial Paper  Funding Facility, for which the Treasury Department has  provided $10 billion of credit protection. In addition, the Federal Reserve established the Money Market  Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), for which the  Treasury Department will provide up to $10 billion of  credit protection. The Federal Reserve established a  companion facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility,  to provide loans against high-quality collateral to  primary dealers that are critical intermediaries in short term funding markets. The announcement of these  facilities strongly affected the targeted markets. After  an initial wave of borrowing from the facilities, market  strains eased and the use of these facilities has abated. To provide more direct support for credit across  the economy, the Federal Reserve established a  number of facilities in March and April. The Treasury’s  equity investments in many of these facilities were  authorized by the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief,  and Economic Security Act). Together, these facilities  will support the fl ow of up to $2.6 trillion of credit to  large employers, small and medium-sized businesses,  households, and state and local governments. The  Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF)  and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility  (SMCCF) were established to support employment  and spending of large, investment-grade businesses.  Following the announcement of the PMCCF and the  SMCCF, spreads of both investment- and speculative grade corporate bonds declined notably, and issuance  of investment-grade corporate bonds strengthened. To  support the longer-term, market-based financing that is  critical to real economic activity, the Federal Reserve  reestablished the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan  Facility to purchase securities backed by auto loans,  equipment leases, credit card loans, and other lending.  The Municipal Liquidity Facility was set up to help  U.S. state and local governments manage cash flow  pressures by providing credit secured through their  short-term obligations. The Federal Reserve established  the Main Street Lending Program to provide up to  $600 billion in four-year loans for small and medium sized businesses that were in good financial standing  before the pandemic. Finally, the Paycheck Protection  Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) was established to  bolster the effectiveness of the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) of the Small Business Administration.  The CARES Act created the PPP program to provide  loans that can help small businesses keep their workers  on payrolls. The PPPLF extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans, taking the  loans as collateral. The Federal Reserve is deeply committed to  transparency and recognizes that the need for  transparency is heightened when it is called upon  to use its emergency powers. Transparency helps  promote the accountability of the Federal Reserve to  the Congress and the public. Specifically, the Board  of Governors will report substantial amounts of  information on a monthly basis for the liquidity and  lending facilities using CARES Act funding as well  as for the PPPLF, including the names and details of  participants in each facility; amounts borrowed and  interest rate charged; and overall costs, revenues, and  fees for each facility. For the few programs that are  targeting financial mark et functioning, the Federal  Reserve will provide a full accounting of transactions  in these facilities. Real-time disclosure would risk  stigmatizing participation in these facilities and  undermining the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide  assurance that these systemically important markets  will continue their critical function in times of severe  market stress. The delay in disclosure will be no longer  than necessary to ensure that participants do not  hesitate to participate. While the facilities are operating,  the Federal Reserve will disclose extensive and regular  aggregate information on total borrowing, collateral  and fees, and interest income. Tools to Lessen Strains in Dollar  Funding Markets The Federal Reserve has taken actions to help  maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and  businesses by reducing financial stresses abroad, which  can spill over into U.S. credit markets. The Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity swap lines improve liquidity  conditions in dollar funding markets in the United  States and abroad by providing foreign central banks  with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to  institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market  stress. These swap lines provide U.S. dollars to a foreign  central bank in exchange for the equivalent amount  of funds in that central bank’s currency based on the  market exchange rate at the time of the transaction. The  Federal Reserve and each participating foreign central  bank agree to swap back the same quantities of their  two currencies at a specified date in the future. During  the week of March 15, 2020, the network of swap lines  was expanded and enhanced by adding additional  central bank counterparties, lowering the price on the  lines, and increasing the frequency and maturity of  dollar operations. In addition to the swap line enhancements, on  March 31, the Federal Reserve announced a new  program to support dollar funding markets, the  temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary  Authorities) Repo Facility. This facility should help  support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury  market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars  to a broad range of countries, many of which do not  have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve.  Under this facility, FIMA account holders can enter  into overnight repurchase agreements (repos) with the  Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S. Treasury  securities they hold at the Federal Reserve for U.S.  dollars. The repos are overnight but can be rolled over  as needed. The facility reduces the need for central  banks to sell their Treasury securities outright, thus helping to avoid disruptions to the Treasury market and  upward pressure on yields. Since its inception, take-up  at the facility has been modest. Regulatory and Supervisory Actions to  Support the Economy since the COVID-19  Outbreak The Federal Reserve has also made several  adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory regime  to facilitate market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected by  COVID-19. These actions fall into the following four  categories: 1. acceleration of previously planned, permanent  adjustments to certain regulatory requirements  to address specific impediments to market  functioning 2. provision of additional time for banking  organizations to phase in new regulatory  requirements 3. temporary relaxation of certain regulatory  requirements or requirements imposing  supervisory burden 4. supervisory statements encouraging banks to  support those affected by COVID-19  The fi rst category includes changing the definition  of eligible retained income to ensure capital and total  loss-absorbing capacity buffers function as intended;  allowing early adoption of a new method for certain  banking organizations to measure counterparty credit risk derivatives contracts; reducing reserve requirement  ratios to zero; and amending Regulation D (Reserve  Requirements of Depository Institutions) to delete the  six-per-month limit on convenience transfers from  the “savings deposit” defi nition. The second category  includes allowing certain banking organizations  additional time to delay the effects of the Current  Expected Credit Losses accounting standard in their  regulatory capital and extending the initial compliance  with the Single-Counterparty Credit Limit rule by  18 months. The third category includes excluding  Treasury securities and reserves from the supplementary  leverage ratio denominator; modifying the liquidity  and capital rules to allow banking organizations to  neutralize the regulatory effects of participating in the  PPPLF and MMLF programs; introducing a change to  support the favorable treatment of term primary credit  loans from the discount window under the liquidity  rules; providing temporary waivers to banks for limits  on transactions with nonbank affiliates that offer  credit and intermediation; temporarily lowering the  community bank leverage ratio to 8 percent; giving  banks flexibility in the timing of regulatory reports; and  granting mortgage servicers flexibility to work with  struggling consumers affected by COVID-19. Finally,  the fourth category includes encouraging banks to use  their capital and liquidity buffers to work constructively  with borrowers and to make short-term loan  modifications on a good faith basis, as well as  encouraging lenders to offer responsible small-dollar  loans to consumers and small businesses and to support  low- and moderate-income borrowers through loans  and banking fee waivers. Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Economies Authorities in foreign economies have announced a  wide array of fiscal, monetary, and regulatory measures  to mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Many foreign governments have enacted sizable  fiscal packages to address the sudden loss of income by  fi rms and households, with a special focus on the most  vulnerable groups, such as low-income individuals, the  unemployed, and small and medium-sized enterprises.  The size of the support is, on average, considerably  larger in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) than in  emerging market economies (EMEs), as many EME  governments have more limited fiscal space. The measures targeted at fi rms aim to keep them  afl oat in the near term, with the hope of preserving  businesses until demand returns. Such measures  include loans at favorable terms and loan guarantees;  deferrals of taxes and social security contributions;  tax breaks and cash transfers, especially for small  and medium-sized enterprises; and targeted  sectoral support. For households, the measures aim  to provide income to those in need and alleviate  payment difficulties. These policies include increased  unemployment and pension payments, mortgage  deferrals, accelerated transfer payments, and direct  cash payments. In addition, several AFEs and some  Asian emerging economies have adopted large direct  wage subsidies to keep workers on fi rms’ payrolls.  Such measures may help limit dislocations in the labor  markets of these countries by subsidizing a significant  reduction in hours worked. The hope of these programs  is that workers’ continued attachment to their fi rms will  preserve human capital and make it readily available to  the fi rms during the recovery that follows the crisis. Many central banks have reduced their policy  rates—often to or near their effective lower  bounds—and have taken substantial actions to start  or expand asset purchases and to support the flow of  credit. Although central banks acted quickly to lower  interest rates, some policymakers in the EMEs expressed  concerns about intensifying capital outflows, while a few AFE central banks worried about the potential harm  to banks’ financial health. Several AFE central banks have purchased  government debt in response to the crisis. These  purchases have been primarily aimed at restoring  market functioning and providing liquidity, but the  purchases have also eased financial conditions by  lowering long-term yields. The Bank of England  (BOE) restarted its purchases of gilts, and the Swedish  Riks bank increased the pace of its existing program.  The European Central Bank (ECB) and the Reserve  Bank of New Zealand introduced and expanded asset  purchase programs. The Reserve Bank of Australia  (RBA) began bond purchases to target the three-year government bond yield at 0.25 percent, the same as its  overnight rate. Some central banks, such as the Bank  of Canada (BOC) and the RBA, have started purchases  of provincial and state bonds to support liquidity in  those markets. To ensure the smooth transmission of  its monetary actions, the ECB has used its flexibility  to weight its purchases more heavily toward bonds of  euro-area member states that face higher yields. Monetary authorities have also adopted policies  to sustain the provision of credit to businesses and  households during the pandemic. Central banks have  purchased a variety of private assets, thus directly  addressing distress in funding markets and helping  ease financial conditions for fi rms. These assets include  corporate bonds purchased by the BOE, ECB, and Bank  of Japan (BOJ); commercial paper bought by the BOC,  BOE, BOJ, and Riks bank; and exchange-traded funds  and real estate investment trusts purchased by the BOJ.  These actions have significantly expanded the balance  sheets of major foreign central banks. Some  central banks in EMEs have also begun purchasing  private assets, with the central banks of Chile and  Colombia buying bank bonds. Several central banks have also activated funding for-lending facilities to provide relatively inexpensive  funding to banks as long as they maintain defined  lending benchmarks, in some cases with extra  incentives to lend to small and medium-sized  enterprises. The BOE, BOJ, ECB, RBA, Riks bank, and  Bank of Korea currently have such programs. Regulators in a number of foreign economies  have introduced various measures that provide relief  for banks to help sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to lend to  the economy. These measures include temporarily  easing capital requirements, such as the reduction— and, in some cases, elimination—of conservation  and countercyclical capital buffers; deferring  the implementation of new, stricter Basel capital  requirements; temporarily easing liquidity requirements (for example, in France, Germany, and the United  Kingdom); and giving banks and their supervisors  more flexibility in dealing with nonperforming loans  (for example, the ECB). In addition, some regulators  have temporarily excluded central bank reserves and  certain safe assets from the calculation of leverage  exposures. Some foreign regulators are considering the  reduction or even elimination of risk weights on new  loans guaranteed by the government. Regulators also  emphasize that banks should continue to apply sound  underwriting standards and conduct solid capital and  liquidity planning and robust risk management. Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets Deterioration in Market Functioning in  February and March Between late February and early March, functioning  in U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage backed securities (MBS) markets became increasingly  strained. Amid growing concerns about the economic  implications of COVID-19, investors sought to sell large  volumes of long-maturity Treasury securities and MBS  and reallocate their portfolios into shorter-term, more  liquid assets. While the yields on long-maturity Treasury  securities initially dropped sharply, in mid-March they  started to increase in the face of these strong selling  pressures. Around the same time as the  increase in long-maturity Treasury yields, the spreads  between yields on MBS and Treasury securities of  comparable duration widened sharply. Indications of  severe dislocations in both markets were also present.  For example, bid-ask spreads for Treasury securities  and agency MBS widened significantly. One factor that may explain these market  dislocations is the effect of widespread selling of  Treasury securities and MBS to primary dealers, who  intermediate a large proportion of trading in these  markets. As a wide range of domestic and foreign  investors (including foreign official investors) rushed  to raise cash or rebalance their portfolios by selling  assets, dealers took large amounts of less liquid securities, including off-the-run Treasury securities  and agency MBS, onto their balance sheets. At  the same time, mortgage refinancing picked up,  prompting substantial turnover in the MBS market.  By early March, some dealers had reportedly run  into balance sheet constraints that hampered their  ability to purchase additional securities, leading to a  deterioration in the functioning of a number of dealer intermediated markets. In the market for Treasury securities, liquidity  conditions were particularly poor for more seasoned, or  “off the run,” securities. However, the most liquid parts  of the market, where newly issued, or “on the run,”  securities are traded electronically, saw unprecedented  strains: The volume of posted quotes, or “market  depth,” dropped sharply, while intraday bid-ask spreads  were exceptionally volatile, particularly for the longest maturity securities. These strains in the most liquid part  of the market suggest that principal trading fi rms— market participants who specialize in high-frequency  and automated intermediation—were significantly less  active than usual. Federal Reserve Policy Actions The disruptions to the functioning of the Treasury  and MBS markets were notable in view of the status of these markets as cornerstones for the operation  of the U.S. and global financial systems and for the  transmission of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve  therefore took a series of policy measures designed  to ensure the smooth functioning of these markets.  These measures included the expansion of repurchase  operations, an increase in purchases of Treasury and  agency MBS securities, the expansion of financing  arrangements for primary dealers, and a temporary  change to the regulatory capital requirements of bank  holding companies and depository institutions. Beginning March 9, 2020, following a directive  from the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the  Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Open Market Desk  increased the size of overnight and term repurchase  operations in order to ensure that the supply of reserves  remained ample and to support the smooth functioning  of the markets in which primary dealers obtain a  substantial proportion of their short-term funding. These changes expanded the supply of short-term  funding available to primary dealers to fi nance their  increased holdings of Treasury securities and agency  MBS at a time when funding costs from other sources  were increasing. Further, on March 12, the Desk  introduced new weekly recurring one- and three-month  term repurchase agreement (repo) operations of up  to $500 billion to address the disruption in Treasury  financing markets.  Finally, on March 16, the Desk  introduced a second daily overnight repo operation and  increased the amount offered in each to $500 billion. Usage of Federal Reserve repo operations peaked on  March 17, with overnight and term repo outstanding  of $496 billion, and has since fallen to $167 billion  as funding strains have eased. In light of more stable  repo market conditions, on May 4, the Desk returned  to once daily overnight repo operations. Further, on May 14, the Desk discontinued its three-month term  repo operations. Despite the much larger volume of repo operations  during the week of March 9, strains in Treasury and  agency MBS markets continued to build. Beginning in  mid-March, therefore, the FOMC directed the Desk to  purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS in order  to support smooth market functioning. On March 15,  the FOMC directed the Desk to increase its holdings  of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and of  agency MBS by at least $200 billion, with purchases  to take place across maturities.  To provide greater  flexibility in addressing the strains, on March 23,  the FOMC authorized purchases of these securities  in the amounts needed to support smooth market  functioning and effective transmission of monetary  policy to broader financial conditions. The securities  targeted for purchase were also expanded to include  agency commercial MBS. Since mid-March, the  Desk has purchased approximately $1.6 trillion and  $719 billion of Treasury securities and agency MBS,  respectively.  The daily amounts of purchases peaked at  approximately $75 billion and $41 billion for Treasury  securities and agency MBS, respectively, in late March  before being reduced in stages to the current average  daily amounts of around $4.0 billion for Treasury  securities and $4.5 billion for agency MBS (including  reinvestments). These purchases helped reduce  financial market volatility by providing a predictable  source of demand for these securities and by taking up  some of the inventories from dealers’ balance sheets. On March 17, the Board, with the approval of the  U.S. Treasury Secretary, established the Primary Dealer  Credit Facility (PDCF) to provide primary dealers  with access to term funding against a broad range of  collateral.  The PDCF helped alleviate funding pressures  faced by primary dealers by allowing them to source  financing more easily for their increased securities  holdings. The amount of PDCF loans outstanding  peaked at around $35 billion in mid-April but has since  declined to around $6 billion. On March 31, the Federal Reserve announced the  establishment of the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility to  allow FIMA account holders, which consist of central  banks and other international monetary authorities  with accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New  York, to exchange their Treasury securities for U.S.  dollars.  This facility allows foreign official institutions  to raise U.S. dollars, if needed, without having to sell  Treasury securities in the open market during periods  of heightened volatility or impaired market functioning.  Since its inception, take-up of the facility has been  modest, as stresses in the U.S. Treasury market have  declined. On April 1, the Federal Reserve released an interim  fi nal rule indicating that holdings of U.S. Treasury  securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks by  bank holding companies would be excluded from the  calculation of the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR)  until March 31, 2021.10 Further, on May 15, 2020,  the federal bank regulatory agencies (the Board of  Governors, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,  and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) released  an interim final rule allowing depository institutions  that are subject to the SLR the option to similarly  exclude U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal  Reserve Banks from their SLR calculations through  March 31, 2021.11 These temporary exemptions are  expected to ease liquidity pressures for primary dealers  and depository institutions subject to these leverage  ratios by providing them with greater flexibility to  intermediate trades with clients in the presence of  temporarily larger inventories of Treasury securities. Improvements in Market Functioning Since the announcement of these policy actions,  trading conditions in the markets for Treasury securities  and MBS have improved steadily. The purchases of  Treasury securities and agency MBS contributed to  the subsequent decline in primary dealers’ inventories  (fi gure C). Bid-ask spreads have narrowed, particularly  in the case of on-the-run Treasury securities, while MBS  spreads have also come down from their peaks in mid-March. In addition to the Federal Reserve’s actions, the  passage of the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Re lief, and  Economic Security Act), together with an improvement  in sentiment among investors regarding the economic  implications of COVID-19, likely contributed to the  improvement in market functioning. In late May, these  inventories temporarily increased to levels previously  seen in March, largely because of increased dealer  holdings of Treasury bills. However, Treasury markets  did not exhibit a recurrence of the notable strains in  trading conditions witnessed earlier this year. Although trading conditions have improved  substantially since mid-March, bid-ask spreads for  longer-maturity and off-the-run Treasury securities  remain wider than in mid-February. Market depth  for on-the-run securities remains low, particularly for  longer-maturity securities. MBS market functioning and  liquidity have largely returned to pre-February norms,  though strains remain in some less liquid parts of  the market. Developments on the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet The Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance  Sheet Has Increased Considerably In response to the financial and economic  disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the  Federal Reserve has eased the stance of monetary  policy and has deployed various tools to promote  smooth functioning of financial markets and the flow  of credit to households and businesses. This discussion  reviews the implications of these actions for the Federal  Reserve’s balance sheet. To support the smooth functioning of those  credit markets that are critical for the economy, the  Federal Reserve purchased Treasury securities and  agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed  securities (MBS), expanded repurchase agreement  (repo) operations, and introduced several credit and  liquidity facilities. As a result of these actions, the size  of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from  $4.2 trillion at the beginning of 2020, approximately  19 percent of U.S. nominal gross domestic product  (GDP), to $7.2 trillion in June 2020, approximately  33 percent of U.S. nominal GDP.  The $3 trillion increase  in the size of the balance sheet was driven by asset  purchases and other extraordinary actions. Open Market Operations, the Discount  Window, and U.S. Dollar Liquidity Swap Lines Since the beginning of 2020, System Open Market  Account holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS increased by $1,805 billion and $427 billion,  respectively.  The markets for both Treasury securities  and agency MBS play a critical role in the U.S.  economy, and the Federal Reserve’s purchases have  fostered a substantial improvement in the functioning of  these markets and the conditions prevailing in them. Furthermore, to address strains in short-term U.S.  dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York’s Open Market Desk expanded its offerings  of overnight and term repo operations. The amount  of repos outstanding reached a peak of $442 billion  in mid-March. Subsequently, given the improvement  in funding market conditions, the Desk announced  several reductions in the frequency of repo operations.  As of June 3, all repos outstanding had declined to  $212 billion, lower than the amount outstanding early  in the year, amid substantial increases in reserves and  improved funding market conditions. On March 15, the Federal Reserve announced  changes to the discount window and encouraged  depository institutions to use the discount window to  meet unexpected funding needs and support the fl ow  of credit to households and businesses.5  The changes  include lowering the primary credit rate by 150 basis  points to 0.25 percent and extending borrowing terms  for up to 90 days. The total outstanding discount  window primary credit borrowing peaked at around  $51 billion in late March and has since declined  to $11 billion in June. Furthermore, the Federal  Reserve maintains standing dollar liquidity swap line  agreements with the central banks of several countries  and instituted temporary agreements with the central  banks of additional countries. After initially ramping up  to $439 billion in March and April, the total agreements  outstanding stayed mostly flat in May to reach  $447 billion as of June 3. Lending Programs and Liquidity Facilities  under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act In addition to the open market operations and  initiatives described earlier, the Federal Reserve further  expanded measures to enhance liquidity and the fl ow  of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Under the  authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act,  with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the  Federal Reserve Board implemented various measures  in response to intensified stresses in several markets. The combined size of the Money Market Mutual  Fund Liquidity Facility and the Primary Dealer Credit  Facility increased to $86 billion in April, but the size  of the facilities declined to $36 billion by June 3. The  combined size of other facilities, such as the Paycheck  Protection Program Lending Facility, the Commercial  Paper Funding Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate  Credit Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility,  has been steadily rising and reached $65 billion as of  June 3. The Expansion of Total Assets Led to Higher  Reserve Balances Held by Depository  Institutions The increase in the Federal Reserve’s assets led to  a commensurate increase in the size of liabilities on  the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The expansion  of total assets from the outright purchases and other actions resulted in reserve balances of $3.3 trillion, an  increase of $1.7 trillion from the beginning of the year.  Additionally, several nonreserve liabilities increased.  In March and April, Federal Reserve notes grew faster  than normal, partially in response to the COVID-19  pandemic, and reached $1.9 trillion, an increase of  $144 billion from the beginning of the year. Furthermore, the U.S. Treasury’s General Account  (TGA) at the Federal Reserve, which the Treasury uses  to receive taxes and proceeds of Treasury auctions  and to process the government’s outlays, increased  substantially. At the beginning of 2020, the TGA  balance was approximately $400 billion. In preparation  for the fiscal spending related to the CARES Act  (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act)  and other stimulus measures, the TGA balance reached  a high of $1.4 trillion on June 3. Summary The COVID-19 outbreak is causing  tremendous human and economic hardship  across the United States and around the world.  The virus and the measures taken to protect  public health have induced a sharp decline in  economic activity and a surge in job losses,  with the unemployment rate, which had been  at a 50-year low, soaring to a postwar record  high. Weaker demand and significantly lower  oil prices are holding down consumer price  inflation. The disruptions to economic activity  here and abroad significantly affected financial  conditions and impaired the flow of credit to  U.S. households and businesses. In response  to these developments, the Federal Reserve  quickly lowered its policy rate to close to  zero to support economic activity and took  extraordinary measures to stabilize markets  and bolster the flow of credit to households,  businesses, and communities. Financial  conditions have improved, in part reflecting  policy measures to support the economy and  the flow of credit. The Federal Reserve is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price-stability goals. Economic and Financial  Developments Economic activity. In response to the public  health emergency precipitated by the spread  of COVID-19, many protective measures were  adopted to limit the transmission of the virus.  These social-distancing measures effectively  closed parts of the economy, resulting in a  sudden and unprecedented fall in economic  activity and historic increases in joblessness.  Although virus mitigation efforts in many  places did not begin until the final two weeks of  March, real personal consumption expenditures  (PCE) plummeted 6.7 percent in March and an  unprecedented 13.2 percent in April. Indicators  suggest spending rose in May, but the April  data and May indicators taken together point  to a collapse in second-quarter real PCE.  Likewise, in the housing market, residential  sales and construction in April posted outsized  declines that are close to some of the largest  ever recorded, and heightened uncertainty  and weak demand have led many businesses  to put investment plans on hold or cancel  them outright. These data, along with other  information, suggest that real gross domestic  product will contract at a rapid pace in the  second quarter after tumbling at an annual rate  of 5 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The labor market. The severe economic  repercussions of the pandemic have been  especially visible in the labor market. Since  February, employers have shed nearly  20 million jobs from payrolls, reversing almost  10 years of job gains. The unemployment rate  jumped from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent  in February to a post–World War II high  of 14.7 percent in April and then moved  down to a still very elevated 13.3 percent  in May. The most severe job losses have  been sustained by those with lower earnings  and by the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among low wage jobs. Inflation. Consumer price inflation has slowed  abruptly. The 12-month change in the price  index for PCE was just 0.5 percent in April.  The 12-month measure of PCE inflation that  excludes food and energy items (so-called  core inflation), which historically has been  a better indicator of where overall inflation  will be in the future than the total figure, fell  from 1.8 percent in February to 1.0 percent in  April. This slowing reflected monthly readings  for March and April that were especially  low because of large price declines in some  categories most directly affected by social  distancing. Overall inflation also has been held  down by substantially lower energy prices,  which more than offset the effects of surging  prices for food. Despite the sharp slowing in inflation, survey-based measures of longer run inflation expectations have generally been  stable at relatively low levels. However, market-based measures of inflation compensation have  moved down to some of the lowest readings  ever seen. Financial conditions. In late February and  over much of March as COVID-19 spread,  equity prices plunged and nominal Treasury  yields dropped substantially, with yields  on longer-term securities reaching all-time  record lows. Spreads of yields on corporate  bonds over those on comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened significantly as  the credit quality of firms declined and market  functioning deteriorated; in addition, loans  were unavailable for most firms, particularly  firms below investment grade. At the most  acute phase of this period, trading conditions  became extremely illiquid and some critical  markets stopped functioning properly.  Consumer borrowing also fell as spending  slumped. Several markets supporting consumer  lending experienced severe strains around  this period, including the agency residential  mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market  as well as the auto, credit card, and student  loan securitization markets. In response, the  Federal Reserve took unprecedented measures  to restore smooth market functioning and to  support the flow of credit in the economy,  including the creation of a number of  emergency credit and liquidity facilities.  These actions, along with the aggressive response  of fiscal policy, stabilized financial markets  and led to a notable improvement in financial  conditions for both firms and households as  well as state and local governments. Even so,  lending standards for both households and  businesses have become less accommodative,  and borrowing conditions are tight for low rated households and businesses. 1 A list of funding, credit, liquidity, and loan facilities  established by the Federal Reserve in response to  COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-andloan-facilities.htm. Financial stability. The COVID-19 pandemic  has abruptly halted large swaths of economic  activity and led to swift financial repercussions.  Despite increased resilience from the financial  and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably  those associated with liquidity and maturity  transformation in the nonbank financial  sector—have amplified some of the economic  effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected  to be significant in the near term. The strains  on household and business balance sheets  from the economic and financial shocks since  March will likely create persistent fragilities.  Financial institutions may experience strains  as a result. The Federal Reserve, with approval  of the Secretary of the Treasury, established  new credit and liquidity facilities under  section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to  alleviate severe dislocations that arose in a  number of financial markets and to support  the flow of credit to households, businesses,  and state and local governments. Furthermore,  as financial stresses abroad risked spilling  over into U.S. credit markets, the Federal  Reserve and several other central banks  announced the expansion and enhancement  of dollar liquidity swap lines. In addition, the  Federal Reserve introduced a new temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  monetary authorities. The Federal Reserve  has also made a number of adjustments to its  regulatory and supervisory regime to facilitate  market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected  by COVID-19.  International developments. The spread of  COVID-19 throughout the world and the  measures taken to contain it have produced  devastating effects on the global economy.  Amid widespread and stringent shutdowns,  recent data suggest that global economic  activity in the first half of the year has  experienced a sharp and synchronized  contraction greater than that in the Global  Financial Crisis. The many mandated closures of nonessential businesses abroad and the  collapse in consumer demand contributed to  a significant deterioration in labor markets  and subdued inflation. Unlike past recessions,  services activity in the foreign economies has  dropped more sharply than manufacturing,  with restrictions on movement having  severely curtailed spending on travel, tourism,  restaurants, and recreation. Against this  backdrop, foreign governments and central  banks have responded strongly and swiftly  to support incomes and to improve market  liquidity and the provision of credit. More  recently, economic activity has begun to revive  in some foreign economies as authorities eased  social-distancing restraints. The rapid spread of COVID-19 weighed  heavily on global risk sentiment, with financial  stresses intensifying and liquidity conditions  deteriorating in many foreign financial  markets. Aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy responses in the United States and  abroad, however, helped boost sentiment and  improve market functioning. On balance,  financial conditions abroad remain tighter  than at the beginning of the year, especially  in some emerging market economies. Since  February, global equity prices moved lower,  sovereign interest rates in the European  periphery increased somewhat, and measures  of sovereign spreads in emerging market  economies widened significantly. In many  advanced economies, long-term interest rates  reached historically low levels. Monetary Policy Easing monetary policy. In light of the effects  of COVID-19 on economic activity and  on risks to the outlook, the FOMC rapidly  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate. Specifically, at two meetings in March,  the FOMC lowered the target range for the  federal funds rate by a total of 1½ percentage  points, bringing it to the current range of 0 to  ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain  this target range until it is confident that the  economy has weathered recent events and is on  track to achieve its maximum-employment and  price-stability goals. The Committee noted that  it would continue to monitor the implications  of incoming information for the economic  outlook, including information related to  public health, as well as global developments  and muted inflation pressures, and that it  would use its tools and act as appropriate to  support the economy. Safeguarding market functioning. Market  functioning deteriorated in many markets  in late February and much of March,  including the critical Treasury and agency  MBS markets. The Federal Reserve swiftly  took a series of policy actions to address  these developments. The FOMC announced  it would purchase Treasury securities and  agency MBS in the amounts needed to  ensure smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy  to broader financial conditions. The Open  Market Desk began offering large-scale  overnight and term repurchase agreement  operations. The Federal Reserve coordinated  with other central banks to enhance the  provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  announced the establishment of temporary  U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap  lines) with additional central banks. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  and international monetary authorities.  (Separately, the Board introduced several  facilities with the backing of the U.S. Treasury  to more directly support the flow of credit to  the economy.) Since these policy actions were  announced, the functioning of Treasury and  MBS markets has gradually improved.  Reflecting these policy  responses, the size of the Federal Reserve’s  balance sheet increased significantly. Fed Listens. The Federal Reserve has released a  report on its Fed Listens initiative. This initiative  is part of a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices  the Federal Reserve uses to pursue its statutory  dual-mandate goals of maximum employment  and price stability. A key component of the  review was a series of public Fed Listens events  aimed at consulting with a broad range of  stakeholders in the U.S. economy on issues  pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives. Special Topics Disparities in job loss during the pandemic. The deterioration in labor market conditions  since February has been sudden, severe, and  widespread. At the same time, workers in  some industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations have experienced  more significant employment declines than  others. Although disparities in labor market  outcomes often arise during recessions, factors  unique to this episode have also contributed  to the recent divergence. Job losses have been  especially severe for those with lower earnings  and for the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among low wage jobs.  Small businesses during the COVID-19 crisis. Small businesses make up nearly half of U.S.  private-sector employment and play key  roles in local communities. The pandemic  poses acute risks to the survival of many  small businesses. Their widespread failure  would adversely alter the economic landscape  of local communities and potentially slow  the economic recovery and future labor  productivity growth. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies  are making aggressive efforts to support small  businesses.  Federal fiscal policy response to COVID-19. While the economic consequences resulting  from the pandemic have been historically  large, the amount of fiscal support that has  been enacted constitutes the fastest and largest  fiscal response to any postwar economic  downturn. The pieces of legislation enacted  since the arrival of the pandemic that have  composed this response are expected to raise  government outlays and reduce tax revenues  by nearly $2 trillion in the current fiscal year.  Policy response to COVID-19 in foreign  economies. Authorities in many foreign  economies have implemented fiscal,  monetary, and regulatory measures to  mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Sizable fiscal packages targeted  the sudden loss of income by firms and  households. Actions by central banks,  including purchases of sovereign and  private bonds, have aimed to restore market  functioning, sustain the provision of credit  to businesses and households during the  pandemic, and support the economic recovery.  Regulatory changes have focused on ensuring  that banks sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to  lend to households and firms. (See the box  “Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Domestic Developments The COVID-19 outbreak has led to an  acute weakening in the labor market  since February  In response to the public health crisis caused  by the spread of COVID-19, households,  businesses, and governments took dramatic  measures to slow the spread of the virus. As  a result, many sectors of the economy were  effectively closed from mid-March through  April but have seen some gradual lifting of  restrictions since then. The severity, scope, and  speed of the ensuing downturn in economic  activity have been significantly worse than any  recession since World War II. After posting  strong gains in both January and February,  payroll employment plummeted by an  unprecedented 22 million in March and April  before adding back 2.5 million jobs in May. The unemployment rate jumped to  14.7 percent in April, the highest level since the  Great Depression. In May, the unemployment  rate fell to 13.3 percent, which was almost  10 percentage points above the February level. Although unemployment soared  for all major racial and ethnic groups, the  unemployment rate for Hispanics posted the  largest increase over this period.  Data received since the survey week for payroll  employment in May suggest that job gains  have continued.  Although initial claims for unemployment insurance have remained  high, it is unclear whether these new claims  reflect additional large numbers of layoffs  or that states are clearing their backlogs of  applications. In addition, weekly employment  data from the payroll processor ADP indicate  that rehiring has continued and that payroll  employment will likely move up again in June,  albeit from what remains a very low level. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)— the share of the population that is either  working or actively looking for work—fell  from around 63½ percent early this year  to 60.8 percent in May. The May  LFPR reading was one of the lowest since the  early 1970s.  Poor employment prospects or  concerns about safety in the workplace might  have caused some of the newly unemployed  to exit the labor force or induced others to  refrain from entering.  However, with so much of the labor market shut in and most new  hiring at a standstill, the distinction between  being unemployed and out of the labor  force likely has become especially blurred.  The employment-to-population ratio for  individuals 16 and over—the share of that  segment of the population who are working— combines movements in both unemployment  and labor force participation. This measure  was 51.3 percent in April and 52.8 percent in  May, the lowest readings in the history of this  series, which began in 1948. Wages are likely being held down,  although compositional shifts have  temporarily boosted some wage measures While reliable data are limited, anecdotal  evidence suggests that the economic downturn  is putting downward pressure on wages.  The series on wage growth computed by the  Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which  tracks the median 12-month wage growth  of individuals reporting to the Current  Population Survey, has changed little in  recent months.  In contrast,  measures that look at average wage costs have  jumped because of compositional effects,  as COVID-19 mitigation efforts and weaker  demand have disproportionately affected  lower-wage workers and left relatively more  higher-wage workers on payrolls. Indeed,  average hourly earnings from the payroll  survey jumped 6.7 percent over the 12 months  ending in May, largely reflecting this change in  the composition of private payrolls. In the first  quarter, both the employment cost index (ECI)  and compensation per hour, which include  both wages and benefits, posted moderate workers who expect them to be temporary.3  Research  has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer financial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations.5 gains, with neither series reflecting much of the  pandemic’s repercussions. Price inflation has moved significantly lower As measured by the 12-month change in  the price index for personal consumption  expenditures (PCE), inflation was just  0.5 percent in April, compared with 1.6 percent  over the same period a year ago. The  abrupt slowing in total PCE price inflation this  year partly reflects sharp declines in consumer  energy prices that resulted from the collapse in  oil prices. In contrast, food prices have moved  higher despite declines in food commodity  prices, likely reflecting higher demand at retail  grocery stores in combination with pandemic related supply chain issues. In addition to  the drop in energy prices, the unprecedented  reductions in demand for some services as a  result of social distancing have led to sharp  drops in prices for airfares and lodging away  from home. These price declines led the  12-month measure of core PCE inflation—that  is, inflation excluding volatile consumer food  and energy prices—to move significantly lower,  falling from 1.8 percent in February to just  1.0 percent in April, as the monthly readings  for March and April were exceptionally  low. An appreciation of the dollar has also  contributed to the slowing in core inflation.  The trimmed mean measure of PCE price  inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Dallas provides an alternative way  to purge measured inflation of transitory  influences, and it is less sensitive than the core  measure to extreme price movements such  as the recent outsized swings in airfares and  lodging.7  The 12-month change in this measure edged down to 1.9 percent in April from  2.1 percent in February. Oil prices are notably lower this spring Against the backdrop of a global collapse  in the demand for oil and a rapid increase in  oil inventories, the Brent price of crude oil  plunged from about $65 per barrel in early  January to around $20 per barrel at the end  of April.  More recently, prices  have rebounded to about $40 per barrel, as  an agreement between OPEC (Organization  of the Petroleum Exporting Countries)  and Russia to cut oil production by nearly  10 percent of global output appears to have  taken effect. Additionally, the dramatic  downturn in global oil demand appears to  be abating as countries begin to ease their  COVID-19 lockdown policies. The decline  in oil prices has contributed to similar  movements in retail gasoline prices, which have  also fallen in recent months. Reported prices of imports other than  energy fell After rising early this year, nonfuel import  prices fell in April, as the dollar appreciated  and the sharp decline in global demand put  downward pressure on non-oil commodity  prices—a substantial component of nonfuel  import prices. Prices of industrial  metals fell sharply in the first months of the  year but edged up in May, as economic activity  in some economies began to revive. However, survey-based measures of  long-run inflation expectations have been  broadly stable . . .  Despite the tumultuous situation of recent  months, survey-based measures of inflation  expectations at medium- and longer-term  horizons, which likely influence actual  inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting  decisions, so far have changed little.  In the University of Michigan Surveys of  Consumers, the median value for inflation  expectations over the next 5 to 10 years was  2.7 percent in May and has fluctuated around  2½ percent since the end of 2016. In the  Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted  by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,  the median of respondents’ expected inflation  rate three years ahead moved lower, on net, in  the second half of last year and has averaged  2.5 percent since. In the Survey of Professional  Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation  for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price  index over the next 10 years edged down to  1.9 percent in the second-quarter survey, below  the 2 percent level that had been reported for  some time. . . . but market-based measures of  inflation compensation are notably lower Market-based measures of inflation  compensation can also be used to make  inferences about inflation expectations.  However, the inference is not straightforward  because market-based measures can be  importantly affected by changes in premiums  that provide compensation for bearing  inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of  longer-term inflation compensation—derived  either from differences between yields on  nominal Treasury securities and those on  comparable-maturity Treasury InflationProtected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation  swaps—have decreased, on net, since the  end of 2019. The 5-year and  5-to-10-year-forward measures of inflation  compensation are about 60 basis points and  40 basis points lower, respectively, than at the beginning of the year.  Both measures dropped  sharply in March, with the 5-year measure  reaching the lowest level since the Global  Financial Crisis and the 5-to-10-year measure  hitting new historical lows. These declines  partly reflected a reduction in the relative  liquidity of TIPS compared with nominal  Treasury securities. As liquidity improved,  inflation compensation partially retraced. The  TIPS-based measure of 5-to-10-year-forward  inflation compensation and the analogous  measure from inflation swaps are now about  1½ percent and 1¾ percent, respectively.10 Real gross domestic product has  contracted severely and with  unprecedented speed  After posting a moderate gain in 2019, real  gross domestic product (GDP) fell at an  annual rate of 5 percent in the first quarter,  with that decline likely all occurring in the final  weeks of the quarter. In the second  quarter, real GDP appears to be plummeting at  a breathtaking pace. Indeed, many professional  forecasters are projecting second-quarter  real GDP to fall at an annual rate of 30 to  40 percent. This severe contraction reflects a  steep drop in consumer spending associated  with measures to contain the spreading virus.  Uncertainty about the economic outlook  also likely has pushed down business fixed  investment, and events abroad have led to a  steep drop in exports. In the manufacturing  sector, output fell sharply in March and posted  its largest decline on record in April as many  factories closed temporarily for all or most of both months. This decrease in factory output  included nearly all motor vehicle and civilian  aircraft manufacturers. However, amid some  easing of restrictions, there are signs that  manufacturing activity moved up in May,  partly as a result of the ramp-up in automotive  production. Social distancing has led to a dramatic  plunge in household spending and  earnings  After having increased at a solid 2.7 percent  pace in 2019, real PCE fell at an annual rate  of 6.8 percent in the first quarter of 2020, one  of the largest quarterly drops in the history  of this series. As concerns about  the virus outbreak grew and government  restrictions mounted, real PCE collapsed,  falling 6.7 percent in March and a record  13.2 percent in April. Although indicators  point to an increase in May—which is  consistent with some relaxation of government  restrictions—taken together, the April data  and May indicators point to an unprecedented  decline in second-quarter consumer outlays.  Real disposable personal income (DPI), a  measure of households’ after-tax purchasing  power, fell in the first quarter, mostly because  of a drop in household income from wages  and salaries. However, in April, real DPI  jumped 13½ percent, pushing its April level  up relative to the fourth quarter at an annual  rate of more than 30 percent. Although  aggregate earnings from employment  collapsed in April, this income loss was more  than offset by government income support  from unemployment insurance and stimulus  payments.12 With households unwilling or  unable to spend a commensurate amount of  their available aggregate income, the April  saving rate shot up to 33 percent. Consumer sentiment has tumbled . . . Households’ concerns about their economic  situation, as reflected in consumer sentiment,  may be leading them to save more for  precautionary reasons. The University of  Michigan Surveys of Consumers index of  consumer sentiment dropped almost 29 points  between February and May, with  declines in both the current and expected  conditions indexes. The Conference Board  survey measure in May also was down sharply  from February, with respondents similarly  grim about current prospects but somewhat  more upbeat than in the Michigan survey  about future conditions.  . . . and overall household wealth fell in  the first quarter  In the first quarter, the ratio of aggregate  household net worth to household income  fell, driven by sharp declines in equity prices.  House prices—which tend to  respond to economic developments more  slowly than equity prices and are of particular  importance for the value of assets held by a  large portion of households—continued to  increase in the first quarter and moved up  further in April Since March,  equity prices have posted sizable gains but are  still below their February peak.  Consumer lending standards have  become less accommodative, but credit  is still available to households with strong  credit profiles  Since the onset of the pandemic, consumer  lending standards have become less  accommodative on balance. Borrowing  conditions are tight for individuals with low  credit ratings, but credit remains available to  those with strong credit profiles. Nevertheless,  consumer borrowing has fallen as spending  has slumped. While banks have  tightened lending standards on credit card and  auto loans, according to the April Senior Loan  Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending  Practices (SLOOS), captive auto lenders have  rolled out generous loan incentives to boost sales. Due to the high cost of servicing  loans in forbearance and uncertainty about  whether borrowers will be able to resume  making payments when the forbearance period  ends, mortgages have become hard to obtain  for borrowers with low credit scores or with  incomes that are difficult to document. Credit  conditions have also tightened significantly for  other higher-risk loans, such as jumbo loans  and cash-out refinances, and the increase in  costs and risks associated with originating  mortgages has raised primary mortgage rates  relative to yields on mortgage-backed securities  (MBS). Nevertheless, mortgage rates currently  have fluctuated around the lowest levels seen in  the past 10 years.  Housing-sector activity has fallen sharply  after starting the year on a solid footing . . . After turning up starting around the middle  of 2019 as mortgage rates moved lower, new  home sales, existing home sales, and single family starts and permits have posted outsized  declines beginning in March that are all  close to the largest ever recorded. Similarly, the COVID-19 outbreak  and mitigation efforts have caused households’  perceptions of homebuying conditions and  builders’ ratings of current sales to move down  despite historically low mortgage rates.  . . . and business fixed investment has  tumbled . . .  The pandemic has curtailed business  investment, as many investment projects were  delayed or canceled because of lower profit  expectations, concerns about future demand,  reduced credit availability, and uncertainty  about how businesses will operate in the  future. Real business fixed investment—that is,  private expenditures for equipment, structures,  research and development (R&D), and other  intellectual property—contracted at an annual  rate of about 8.0 percent in the first quarter  of 2020, coming off a drop of 0.4 percent  for 2019 as a whole. The decline  was centered in equipment investment as well as in outlays for nonresidential buildings. In  addition, lower oil prices contributed to a drop  in investment in drilling and mining structures.  Investment in intellectual property like  software, R&D, and entertainment originals  recorded a tepid increase in the first quarter  after posting solid gains in 2019. Forward looking indicators of business spending, such  as new orders of nondefense capital goods,  excluding the volatile aircraft category, have  plunged recently amid sharply lower business  sentiment and profit expectations from  industry analysts.  . . . while corporate financing conditions  have deteriorated  Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms  were robust early in the year but tumbled  during the global spread of COVID-19. The gross issuance of corporate  bonds in the investment-grade segment was  solid until late February, when it became  intermittent at best as market functioning  deteriorated. Meanwhile, issuance in the  speculative-grade segment was essentially  nonexistent following the broad risk-off  sentiment in the market over the public  health crisis. While investment-grade issuance  recovered at a strong pace following the  March Federal Reserve announcement on  corporate credit funding facilities, high-yield  issuance began to pick up only after the  April announcement to expand the facilities  to include support for some recent “fallen  angels”—bonds downgraded to a speculative grade credit rating from an investment-grade  rating because of declining credit quality— and high-yield exchange-traded funds. The  solvency outlook of corporate bonds for  both the investment- and speculative-grade  segments of the market dropped over the first half of the year as the pace of downgrades  intensified and the volume of defaults picked  up. Furthermore, the monthly volume of  fallen angels reached a record high in March,  and market analysts forecast this trend to  continue with a record annual volume of  debt being downgraded to high yield this  year amid declining earnings and elevated  leverage. Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury securities  have widened substantially amid worsening  credit conditions. Institutional leveraged  loan issuance volume was robust to start the  first quarter, but it subsequently came to a  standstill in March because of the pandemic.  Newly launched volume increased somewhat  starting in April but remains at subdued  levels. Banks tightened standards and terms  significantly on commercial and industrial  (C&I) loans, according to respondents to  the April SLOOS, and demand for C&I  loans strengthened amid concerns about the  pandemic. C&I loan growth at banks has  picked up in the first half of the year, largely  driven by soaring credit-line drawdowns  since the beginning of March, as firms with  existing credit lines sought to increase their  internal cash buffers, and by lending to smaller  businesses through the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) since April. Both exports and imports declined  sharply in the first quarter The sudden drop in global demand and  production and stifled global value chains took  a toll on international trade. U.S. real exports  of goods and services in the first quarter  declined at an annual rate of nearly 9 percent,  as exports of services—including travel to  the United States—plunged. Real  imports fell just over 15 percent, as U.S.  consumers and firms cut back on spending,  travel abroad halted, and shipments of  imported goods were delayed. The trade deficit, relative to GDP, narrowed in the first  quarter compared with 2019. Federal fiscal stimulus will provide  substantial support to economic activity  in 2020 while also significantly boosting  the budget deficit and debt . . . Federal fiscal policy measures enacted in  response to the pandemic have provided  income support for households and businesses;  increased grants-in-aid to state and local  governments; and facilitated loans to  businesses, households, states, and localities.  The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)  projects that in fiscal year 2020, the additional  federal government expenditures and foregone  revenues from these policies will total more  than $2 trillion, around 10 percent of nominal  GDP. In addition, the decline in economic activity has pushed  down tax collections while pushing up outlays  for certain transfer programs—most notably  for unemployment insurance and Medicaid.  These tax decreases and transfer increases, working in tandem with the  discretionary stimulus, will support aggregate  demand and help blunt the extent of the  economic downturn.  The combination of the discretionary stimulus  measures and the response of receipts and  expenditures to the decline in economic  activity—referred to as automatic stabilizers— are expected to cause the budget deficit to  balloon from its already elevated level. The  CBO expects the federal unified budget deficit  to widen from 4½ percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2019 to 18 percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2020, the largest annual deficit as a  share of GDP in the post–World War II era. The ratio of federal debt held by the public  to nominal GDP is expected to rise from  79 percent in fiscal 2019 to 101 percent by the  end of fiscal 2020, the highest debt-to-GDP  ratio since 1947. . . . and state and local governments  confront a fiscal crisis as tax  revenue shrinks A sharp reduction in tax revenues due to  a collapse in income and retail sales tax  revenue is placing significant stress on state  governments. Local governments, which rely  on more cyclically stable property taxes, will be  somewhat less directly affected. Nevertheless,  local governments rely on aid from their  state governments, particularly for primary  and secondary education, and the budget  strains at the state level will therefore likely be  passed down to localities. In April and May,  state and local governments shed more than  1½ million jobs as schools and universities  closed early and local governments reduced  their noneducation workforce. These state  and local budget strains will be partially offset  by grants from the federal government.  Risks to the outlook are greater than usual The path ahead is extraordinarily uncertain.  First and foremost, the pace of recovery will  ultimately depend on the evolution of the  COVID-19 outbreak in the United States  and abroad and the measures undertaken to  contain it. Importantly, some small businesses  and highly leveraged firms might have to shut  down permanently or declare bankruptcy,  which could have longer-lasting repercussions  on productive capacity. (For a more in-depth  discussion of the potential consequences of  the shutdowns on small businesses, see the  box “Small Businesses during the COVID-19  Crisis.”) In addition, there is uncertainty about  future labor demand and productivity as firms  shift their production processes to increase  worker safety, realign their supply chains,  or move services online. Furthermore, if  employees are not called back to their former  jobs, their period of unemployment could  increase, potentially leading to lower wages  when they do eventually find a job. Finally,  applications for employer identification  numbers, which are an early indicator of new  business formations, are tracking well below  levels from recent years and may suggest a  slower pace of future job creation through  this channel.  Financial Developments The expected path of the federal funds  rate over the next several years has fallen  to near zero The expected path of the federal funds rate  over the next several years has declined since  early January and is now flat at the effective  lower bound for the next few years.  Before the Federal Reserve lowered the  target range for the federal funds rate to 0  to ¼ percent in March, policy expectations  dropped substantially in late February  and early March as COVID-19 concerns  intensified. Market-based measures suggest  that the expected federal funds rate remains  below 0.25 percent through mid-2023.18 Survey-based measures of the expected path  of the policy rate also moved down from the  levels observed at the end of 2019. According  to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers  and Survey of Market Participants, both  conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York in April, the median of respondents’  modal projections implies a flat trajectory for  the target range of the federal funds rate at the  effective lower bound for the next few years.19 The U.S. nominal Treasury yield curve has  shifted down sharply . . . After moving lower over the second half of  2019, nominal Treasury yields fell sharply in  late February and early March as investors’  concerns regarding the implications of  the COVID-19 outbreak for the economic  outlook led to both falling policy expectations  and flight-to-safety flows, with longer term Treasury security yields dropping to  historically low levels. Longer term yields increased moderately and realized  volatility spiked for a period in March as  selling pressures grew, leading to dealer  balance sheet capacity constraints and  impaired trading conditions, before falling  back again after the Federal Reserve’s actions  helped restore smooth market functioning.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and  MBS Markets” in Part 2 for a more detailed  description of the Treasury market during  March.) More recently, yields on longer-term  Treasury securities rose somewhat, linked at  least partially to the expected increase in the  issuance of longer-term Treasury securities  as well as some improvement in investor  sentiment. Options prices suggest that near term uncertainty about longer-dated Treasury  yields rose sharply in March to levels not  seen since the Global Financial Crisis before  retracing. . . . but spreads of other long-term debt  to Treasury securities rose  Yields on 30-year agency MBS—an important  determinant of mortgage interest rates— decreased somewhat, on balance, though less  than the yields on nominal Treasury securities,  since the start of the year and remained very  low by historical standards.  Early in the year, yields on both investment and speculative-grade corporate bonds as  well as primary- and secondary-market  municipal bonds were near record lows. Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury yields  were in the lower end of their historical  distribution. Since mid-February, corporate  spreads have increased appreciably as market  functioning deteriorated and credit quality  declined. In March, spreads to comparable maturity Treasury securities increased sharply  for corporate debt but remained below those  observed during the 2008 Global Financial  Crisis. Spreads started to normalize following  the Federal Reserve announcements of  corporate bond facilities in late March,  particularly for investment-grade corporate  debt, but remain higher than at the end  of 2019. Similarly, yields and spreads for  municipal debt rose strikingly in March, with  spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury  securities spiking to their highest level since the  Global Financial Crisis as market functioning  declined and concerns about municipal  credit quality arose. Yields on municipal debt  partially recovered following Federal Reserve  announcements in late March and April of  support to municipal debt markets through  liquidity facilities.  Liquidity in markets for Treasury  securities and mortgage-backed securities  deteriorated sharply before recovering  following various Federal Reserve actions A number of indicators of Treasury market  functioning—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, estimates of transaction costs, and  measures of market depth—deteriorated  significantly in late February and March, but  conditions improved considerably following  Federal Reserve asset purchases and the  creation of credit and liquidity facilities.  Bid-ask spreads remain  higher than those seen at the end of the year  in the off-the-run market and for the 30-year  bond in the on-the-run market, and market  depth remains low. MBS spreads have fallen  back markedly, but prepayment risk and  uncertainty about forbearance continue to put  upward pressure on spreads. Strains remain in  some less liquid parts of the market.  Broad equity prices dropped notably  amid the global spread of COVID-19  before rebounding  Equity prices continued to increase early in the  year before tumbling in March, dropping as  much as 34 percent from peak to trough. Prices  have mostly recovered against a background  of unprecedented, forceful, and rapid  monetary and fiscal policy responses as well  as recent tentative signs of economic revival  associated with the easing of restrictions and  in the face of bleak forecasts for U.S. firms’  earnings in 2020. The decline in  stock prices was widespread across all sectors,  with the largest declines in the energy and  banking sectors. Measures of implied and  realized stock price volatility for the S&P  500 index—the VIX and the 20-day realized  volatility—spiked to levels that were most  recently observed during the financial crisis. They have since retraced much of  that increase but remain at elevated levels. (For  a discussion of financial stability issues, see  the box “Developments Related to Financial  Stability.”) While overnight money market rates  generally moved down in line with  decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s target range, short-term  funding markets experienced strains  before the announcement and launch of  Federal Reserve facilities Decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s (FOMC) target range for the  federal funds rate in March transmitted  effectively through overnight money markets,  with yields on a broad set of money market  instruments moving lower in response to  the FOMC’s policy actions. Over the first  half of the year, the effective federal funds  rate (EFFR) remained within the target  range. After printing at the top  of the target range for a few days following  the March 15 rate cut, the EFFR softened  considerably to trade near the bottom of the  range amid substantial increases in reserves.  Though upward pressures on interest rates  in overnight money markets were generally  well contained during March, short-term  funding markets experienced a liquidity  squeeze. Certain other short-term interest  rates, including those pertaining to commercial  paper and negotiable certificates of deposit,  moved up markedly. However, since the  announcement and launch of the Federal  Reserve liquidity facilities directed toward  these markets, short-term funding rates have  declined significantly.  Bank credit continued to expand, while  bank profitability declined Aggregate credit provided by commercial  banks trended up through the first half of  2020, driven largely by soaring C&I creditline drawdowns since early March and by  loans originated under the PPP since April.  While commercial real estate loan  growth remained strong, growth in residential  real estate loans on banks’ balance sheets has  slowed since the beginning of the year, and  outstanding consumer loans contracted in April. First-quarter earnings reports of larger  banks indicate that bank profitability declined  considerably in the first quarter of 2020  because of narrower net interest margins and  notable increases in loan loss provisions.20 International Developments  Economic activity abroad plunged in the  first half of the year The spread of COVID-19 throughout the  world and the measures taken to contain it  have produced devastating effects on the global  economy. Many countries closed nonessential  businesses and restricted people’s movement  during the first months of the year, leading  to a sharp global economic contraction.  Foreign GDP declined at about a 13 percent  annualized rate in the first quarter, and recent  indicators point to an even larger contraction  in the second quarter. Available  data suggest that the decline in foreign activity  in the first half of the year has been greater  than during the Global Financial Crisis. The collapse in economic activity across  countries followed the progression of the  virus. In China, where regions underwent  strict lockdowns as early as January, GDP  in the first quarter dropped at a stunning  36 percent annualized rate. As the  virus spread to Europe, many countries in  the region imposed strict social-distancing  restrictions; euro-area GDP contracted nearly  14 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The  substantial decline in commodity prices also  depressed activity of commodity exporters  such as Canada and several Latin American  countries. Recent data indicate that Chinese  production began to revive in the spring,  as infection rates fell and restrictions were gradually lifted. Indicators of  Chinese consumption, however, remain weak.  A number of advanced foreign economies  (AFEs) began to relax social-distancing  restraints in recent weeks. Labor market conditions deteriorated and  inflation fell . . . Amid widespread business closures and  collapsing demand, labor market conditions  abroad have deteriorated sharply in recent  months, albeit with differences across  countries. Several European and Asian  countries have thus far experienced sizable  declines in hours worked but relatively small  increases in unemployment given the size  of the drop in economic activity, partly  reflecting direct wage subsidies provided by the  governments to keep workers on firms’ payrolls.  In other countries, unemployment  rates increased markedly.  Although the shutdowns across the world  have reduced the global supply of goods and  services, the depressive effects on demand of  lower income, social distancing, and increased  uncertainty have predominated, driving down  inflation in the foreign economies. In several  AFEs, recent inflation readings have been well  below central bank targets, reflecting large  declines in energy prices as well as subdued  core inflation. . . . prompting swift and substantial  policy responses Foreign fiscal authorities have aimed to fill  income gaps resulting from businesses closing  and workers staying home. Many national  governments acted decisively to support firms’  balance sheets through tax deferrals, loans,  and loan guarantees; to encourage firms to  retain workers through wage subsidies; and to  support household spending through enhanced  unemployment benefits and cash transfers.  In addition, many foreign central banks  reduced their policy rates, initiated or  enhanced credit facilities, and relaxed capital requirements for financial institutions.  Several AFE central banks also ramped  up asset purchase programs to alleviate  liquidity strains in their domestic capital  markets. Some emerging market economy  (EME) central banks followed suit. See  the box “Policy Response to COVID-19 in  Foreign Economies” for a more detailed  discussion of fiscal and monetary policies  implemented abroad. Downside risks remain high Despite aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy actions, risks abroad are skewed to  the downside. The future progression of the  pandemic remains highly uncertain, with  resurgence of the outbreak a substantial  risk. In addition, the economic damage of  the recession may be quite persistent. The  collapse in demand may ultimately bankrupt  many businesses, thereby reducing business  dynamism and innovation. Unlike past  recessions, services activity has dropped  more sharply than manufacturing—with  restrictions on movement severely curtailing  expenditures on travel, tourism, restaurants,  and recreation—and social-distancing  requirements and attitudes may further weigh  on the recovery in these sectors. Disruptions  to global trade may also result in a costly  reconfiguration of global supply chains.  Persistently weak consumer and firm demand  may push medium- and longer-term inflation  expectations well below central bank targets,  particularly in regions with already low  inflation at the onset of the recession. Finally,  additional expansionary fiscal policies— possibly in response to future large-scale  outbreaks of COVID-19—could significantly  increase government debt and add to sovereign  risk, especially for countries with already  limited fiscal space.  Financial conditions abroad tightened,  especially in some emerging market  economies The precipitous spread of COVID-19 in the  first months of the year weighed heavily on global risk sentiment, and many financial  markets suffered from severe illiquidity.  Aggressive fiscal and monetary policy  responses in the United States and abroad,  however, helped boost sentiment and improve  market functioning, contributing to a partial  retracement. On net, financial conditions  abroad remain tighter than at the beginning of  the year, especially in some EMEs.  Financial conditions in the AFEs largely  tracked financial market developments in the  United States. Major AFE equity indexes  dropped substantially as news about the spread  of COVID-19 and the associated measures  to contain it were reported, but those indexes  rebounded following the announcement of  extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy  actions and, more recently, tentative signs  of economic stabilization.  Notwithstanding temporary increases due to  poor market functioning, long-term sovereign  yields in major advanced economies fell, on  net, as flight-to-safety demand surged, policy  rates reached their effective lower bounds in  several countries, and expectations of future  policy rates declined markedly.  Sovereign interest rates for economies in the  euro-area periphery were sensitive to news  about the size and form of European-wide  fiscal support for the recovery and, on net,  remain a bit higher than at the beginning of  the year. In recent months, Fitch  and DBRS Morningstar downgraded Italy’s  long-term debt ratings. Financial conditions in some EMEs tightened,  especially in Latin American countries. Equity  indexes suffered widespread losses early in  the year, and rebounds since then have been  uneven across countries. While equity indexes  in emerging Asia partially recovered, Mexican  and Brazilian equity indexes underperformed  other EME equities. In March,  borrowing rates for corporations increased  to levels not seen since the Global Financial  Crisis, although they have subsequently  declined somewhat. In the first half of the  year, funds dedicated to investing in EMEs experienced outflows, and sovereign borrowing  spreads increased sharply before moving down  more recently. The tightening in  some EME financial conditions appears to  reflect investors’ preference for safe and liquid  assets; a reduced confidence in the ability  of some governments to contain the health  crisis; and heightened uncertainty about the  prospects for EME public finances, commodity  prices, and global trade. The dollar appreciated The foreign exchange value of the dollar  increased nearly 5 percent since the start of  the year, as the boost from safe-haven demand  outweighed the effects of lower U.S. interest  rates. On a trade-weighted basis,  the dollar increased about 1.5 percent against  AFE currencies and 7 percent against EME  currencies. The Mexican peso and Brazilian  real depreciated about 16 percent and  30 percent, respectively, partly in response to  lower commodity prices. The Chinese renminbi  fluctuated largely in response to news about  the outbreak and policy actions of Chinese  authorities and, on net, depreciated slightly  since the beginning of the year. The Federal Open Market Committee  quickly reduced the federal funds rate to  the effective lower bound . . . In light of the effects of COVID-19 on the  economy and on risks to the outlook, the  Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate by a total of 1½ percentage points—from  a range of 1½ to 1¾ percent to one of 0 to  ¼ percent—over two meetings in early and  mid-March (figure 46).21 Specifically, in early  March, the Committee lowered the target  range for the federal funds rate ½ percentage  point, to 1 to 1¼ percent. In mid-March, the  Committee further lowered the target range  1 percentage point, to 0 to ¼ percent. The  Committee expects to maintain this target  range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to  achieve its maximum-employment and price stability goals. In connection with the changes  in the target range, the Federal Reserve  reduced the interest paid on reserve balances  and decreased the interest rate offered on  overnight reverse repurchase agreements at the  two March meetings. . . . and the FOMC increased the holdings  of Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities in the System  Open Market Account At its mid-March meeting, along with its  decision to lower the target range for the  federal funds rate, the FOMC emphasized  that it is prepared to use its full range of tools  to support the flow of credit to households  and businesses, thereby promoting its  maximum-employment and price-stability  goals. To support the smooth functioning of  markets for Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—markets  central to the flow of credit to households and businesses—the Committee announced  that it would increase its holdings of  Treasury securities by at least $500 billion  and its holdings of agency MBS by at least  $200 billion over coming months.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury  and MBS Markets.”) Later in March,  the Committee announced that it would  continue to purchase Treasury securities  and agency MBS in the amounts needed to  support smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy to  broader financial conditions. The  Committee also included agency commercial  MBS in its purchases for the first time. In  June, the Committee announced that, over  coming months, the Federal Reserve will  increase its holdings of Treasury securities  and agency residential and commercial MBS  at least at the current pace to sustain smooth  market functioning, thereby fostering effective  transmission of monetary policy to broader  financial conditions.  The Federal Reserve has continued rolling  over at auction all principal payments from its  holdings of Treasury securities. Before mid-March, to allow for a gradual runoff  of agency securities, the Federal Reserve  reinvested principal payments from agency  debt and agency MBS of up to $20 billion per  month in Treasury securities; agency MBS  principal payments in excess of $20 billion  each month were reinvested in agency MBS.  Beginning in mid-March, the Committee  announced it would reinvest all principal  payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings  of agency debt and agency MBS back into  agency MBS. (The box “Developments on the  Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” discusses  changes in the size and composition of the  Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the  past year.) The Federal Reserve eased lending terms  for primary credit borrowing . . . Primary credit is the Federal Reserve lending  program available to depository institutions  in generally sound financial condition. Amid  increasing stress in funding markets in mid-March, the Federal Reserve announced  several changes to the primary credit program.  Importantly, the primary credit rate was set at  the top of the target range for the federal funds  rate rather than 50 basis points above the top  of the range. The term of primary credit loans,  which had previously been mainly overnight  advances, was extended to allow depository  institutions to borrow for up to 90 days.  Federal Reserve communication encouraged  the use of the discount window to help meet  the demand for credit from households and  businesses. Discount window borrowing under the  primary credit program increased significantly  following these developments. Primary  credit outstanding reached a peak of around  $50 billion in late March 2020—its highest  level since the financial crisis and well above  the typical level of around $10 million that  prevailed in 2019. Use of primary credit was  fairly widespread, with discount window loans  being extended to institutions across a range  of size categories. Overall, the outstanding  amount of primary credit loans declined to  about $10 billion by early June. . . . and undertook actions with other  central banks to support U.S. dollar  funding markets The Federal Reserve announced coordinated  actions with other central banks to enhance  the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  the establishment of temporary U.S. dollar  liquidity arrangements (swap lines) with  nine additional central banks. The size of the swap lines  increased from close to zero in mid-March to  almost $450 billion by the end of April. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repo facility for foreign and international  monetary authorities. The FOMC is committed to using its tools  to promote maximum employment and  price stability The ongoing public health crisis will weigh  heavily on economic activity, employment,  and inflation in the near term and pose  considerable risks to the economic outlook  over the medium term. The FOMC is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price-stability goals. The  Committee will continue to monitor the  implications of incoming information for the  economic outlook, including information  related to public health, as well as global  developments and muted inflation pressures,  and it will use its tools and act as appropriate  to support the economy. The Federal Reserve has continued  to review its strategic framework for  monetary policy In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad  review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to  pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of  maximum employment and price stability. A  key component of the review was a series of  public Fed Listens events. The Federal Reserve  held 14 events around the country in 2019 to  consult with a range of organizations on the  effects that labor market conditions, inflation,  and interest rates have on them and their  communities. In light of the rapidly changing  public health and economic environments due  to COVID-19, the Federal Reserve convened  another event in May 2020 to get an update.  The Federal Reserve has released a report on  its Fed Listens initiative. The lessons learned from the Fed Listens initiative were never more  important than they are today as Americans  navigate through these challenging times.  The Federal Reserve expects to complete  the review of its monetary policy strategy,  tools, and communication practices later this  year. The Federal Reserve remains focused  on the attainment of its goals of maximum  employment and price stability, including  laying the foundation for the return to a strong  labor market. Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open  Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held  on June 9–10, 2020, meeting participants  submitted their projections of the most likely  outcomes for real gross domestic product  (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and  inflation for each year from 2020 through 2022  and over the longer run. Each participant’s  projections were based on information  available at the time of the meeting, together  with his or her assessment of appropriate  monetary policy and assumptions about other  factors likely to affect economic outcomes.  The longer-run projections represent each  participant’s assessment of the value to which  each variable would be expected to converge,  over time, under appropriate monetary policy  and in the absence of further shocks to the  economy. “Appropriate monetary policy”  is defined as the future path of policy  that each participant deems most likely to  foster outcomes for economic activity  and inflation that best satisfy his or her  individual interpretation of the Federal  Reserve’s congressionally mandated goals of  promoting maximum employment and  price stability. All participants judged that the uncertainty  attending their projections was higher than  the average of the past 20 years. The median  of participants’ projections for real GDP  growth was negative 6.5 percent for 2020,  with individual projections ranging from  negative 10.0 to negative 4.2 percent (table 1 and figure 1). The median of projections for  real GDP growth was 5.0 percent for 2021 and  3.5 percent for 2022. The median assessment  of real GDP growth in the longer run was  1.8 percent, down 0.1 percentage point since  the December 2019 projections included in the  February 2020 Monetary Policy Report. The median of projections for the  unemployment rate in the fourth quarter  of 2020 was 9.3 percent, with individual  projections ranging from 7.0 to 14.0 percent.  The median of projections for the  unemployment rate was 6.5 percent and  5.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2021 and  2022, respectively. These values are above the  median assessment of the longer-run normal  unemployment rate, 4.1 percent, which was  unchanged from December. The median of projections for inflation, as  measured by changes in the price index for  personal consumption expenditures (PCE),  was 0.8 percent for 2020, 1.6 percent for  2021, and 1.7 percent for 2022. Almost all  participants expected inflation to run below  the Committee’s longer-run objective of  2 percent through 2022. The medians of  projections for core PCE inflation were  1.0 percent for this year, 1.5 percent for 2021,  and 1.7 percent for 2022. With regard to participants’ projections  of appropriate monetary policy, almost  all participants expected to maintain the  target range for the federal funds rate at  0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of  2022. These projections represent  participants’ individual assessments of  appropriate policy consistent with their  projections of economic growth, employment,  inflation, and other factors. However, the  economic outlook is inherently uncertain; thus,  each participant’s assessment of appropriate  policy is also necessarily uncertain and will  change in response to changes to the economic  outlook and associated risks. The median  estimate of the longer-run level for the federal  funds rate, 2.5 percent, was unchanged from  December. A more complete description of the Summary of  Economic Projections will be released with the  minutes of the June 9–10, 2020, FOMC meeting  on July 1. Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic For nearly all industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations, employment was substantially  lower in May than in February. While job loss has been  pervasive, some groups have experienced more severe  employment declines than others, particularly workers  with lower earnings and the socioeconomic groups that  are disproportionately represented among low-wage  jobs; employment declines have also been larger in  some states than in others. Although disparities in labor  market outcomes across groups often widen during  recessions, certain factors unique to this episode—in  particular, the social-distancing measures taken by  households, businesses, and governments to limit  in-person interactions—have contributed to the recent  divergence. Because jobs differ in the degree to which they  involve personal contact and physical proximity, in  whether they provide an “essential function,” and in  whether their business operations can be conducted  remotely, social-distancing measures have had  disparate consequences across industries and, in  turn, on particular types of workers who tend to work  in heavily affected industries. For example, the net  proportion of jobs lost since February has been greater  in industries such as accommodation and food services  (where social-distancing regulations have severely  affected many businesses and where workers are  frequently unable to work from home) and smaller in  industries such as professional and business services  and financial activities (where workers may be less  affected by social distancing and are generally more  able to conduct work from home).  In keeping with this  pattern, states that rely heavily on tourism—such as  Hawaii and Nevada—saw exceptionally large increases  in unemployment through April (the most recent month  for which state unemployment rate data are available). Net job loss since February thus far has been  concentrated in lower-wage industries, suggesting that  employment declines have been disproportionately large among lower-paid workers who may be less  able to financially weather an extended period of  unemployment. Indeed, estimates of employment  declines based on a worker’s previous wage (using data  from the payroll provider ADP), shown in figure A, also  indicate this disproportionate pattern of job loss. From  February to mid-April, employment fell substantially  more for workers who were previously earning wages  in the bottom fourth of wage earners, compared with  other workers. Despite somewhat more rapid job  growth for lower-wage earners in subsequent weeks,  employment for lower-wage earners remains roughly  35 percent lower than in February, compared with  5 to 15 percent lower employment for higher-wage  earners. These differences are also consistent with  results from a recent survey conducted by the Federal  Reserve Board that indicated that among households  with an annual income of $40,000 or less, nearly  40 percent of individuals who were employed in  February experienced job loss in March or early April,  compared with 20 percent of the population overall. Figure B illustrates that the decline in employment  (as a fraction of the population) has also been especially  large for people aged 16 to 24 compared with older  workers, for people without a bachelor’s degree  compared with those with at least a bachelor’s degree,  and for Hispanics compared with other races and  ethnicities. In addition, employment rates have dropped  somewhat more for women than for men, and for  Asians and African Americans compared with whites. In  general, the groups with the larger employment declines  are most commonly employed in the industries that have  experienced the greatest net employment declines thus  far, such as accommodation, food service, and retail  trade; these demographic groups are also less likely to  report being able to work from home. In the months ahead, labor market prospects for the  unemployed and underemployed—both overall and  for particularly hard-hit groups of workers—will largely  depend on the course of the COVID-19 outbreak  itself and on actions taken to halt its spread. Recent  job losses differ from those of previous recessions  not only in the suddenness and severity with which  they occurred, but also in the unusually high share of workers who expect them to be temporary.  Research  has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer financial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations. Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19 In response to the immense health and economic  consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal  lawmakers have enacted a variety of measures. These  measures are expected to raise government outlays and  reduce tax revenues—the sum of which we refer to as  fiscal support—by nearly $2½ trillion over 10 years, of  which about $2 trillion is expected in the current fiscal  year, according to the Congressional Budget Office  (CBO). The legislation also included  $454 billion for the Department of the Treasury to fund  lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve  and $46 billion to provide loans to the airline industry. Consistent with the historically large economic  consequences resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic,  the amount of fiscal support that has been enacted  constitutes the fastest and largest fiscal response to any  postwar economic downturn. Figure B breaks down the estimated fiscal support  for fiscal year 2020 into four broad  categories: (1) direct aid to households, (2) loans or  grants to small businesses, (3) other aid to businesses,  and (4) government purchases of goods and services or  grants to state and local governments. The rest of this discussion provides a brief overview  of the main components of the four stimulus bills,  focusing on the CBO’s estimate of fiscal support  (increased outlays minus reduced tax revenues) for  fiscal 2020, organized by the four categories assigned  in the figure. Direct Aid to Households: $740 billion The largest component of income support is roughly  $290 billion in one-time payments to households.  These stimulus checks provide households with a  one-time refundable tax credit of $1,200 per adult  and $500 per child 16 and under, with a phaseout  at incomes between $75,000 and $100,000 for  individuals and between $150,000 and $200,000  for couples. By the end of May, according to the Treasury Department, nearly all of the stimulus checks  had been disbursed. The second major piece of  household income support is $230 billion in expanded  unemployment insurance (UI) benefits. UI benefits  were increased by $600 per week through the end of  July; eligibility was expanded through December for  “gig” workers, the self-employed, and those who are  unable to work as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak;  and benefit durations were extended by 13 weeks  through December. According to the CBO, around  $70 billion in the more generous weekly benefits had  been paid through the end of May. The legislation also  provides student loan and mortgage relief, suspending  loan payments and interest accrual on federal student  loans until the end of September and reducing or  suspending mortgage payments for mortgages backed  by government-sponsored enterprises.  Another  component of the legislation provides federally  mandated paid sick leave for workers at employers with fewer than 500 employees. The cost of the sick leave  is rebated to employers through refundable payroll tax  credits, which are expected to total about $90 billion in  fi scal 2020. Employees are entitled to up to two weeks  of paid leave equal to normal earnings for employees or  family members who are directly affected by COVID-19  or COVID-19-related closures; additionally, employees  are entitled to 10 weeks of paid leave at two-thirds  normal pay for those caring for a child whose school  or daycare is closed. In addition, about $90 billion in  tax relief was provided to households in fiscal 2020,  primarily through expanding the deductibility of certain  business losses from individual tax liabilities. Loans and Grants to Small Businesses:  $760 billion The Paycheck Protection Program provides about  $670 billion in support to businesses with fewer than  500 employees through loans of up to 250 percent  of monthly payroll costs before the crisis (subject to  a cap of $10 million). These loans will be forgiven if  employment and compensation are maintained relative  to a pre-crisis level. In addition, small businesses are  supported by about $90 billion in Small Business  Administration (SBA) Economic Injury Disaster Loans and by six-month loan payment deferrals for new and  existing SBA borrowers. Other Aid to Businesses: $420 billion Businesses are aided by several provisions that  reduce tax revenues in fiscal 2020, with the largest  reduction coming from delayed payment of employer side payroll taxes until 2021 and 2022, which is  expected to reduce tax payments by $210 billion in  fiscal 2020 but mostly be made up in subsequent  years. An additional roughly $90 billion reduction  in fiscal 2020 tax liability results from modifications  of the treatment of net operating losses and interest  expenses for corporations. The legislation also provides  nearly $50 billion in payroll tax relief for businesses  significantly affected by COVID-19 shutdowns in  order to retain employees. Aside from tax relief,  about $20 billion in loans and grants are expected  to go to passenger and cargo air carriers and related  contractors to support payroll expenses for aviation  workers affected by the pandemic. In addition, about  $50 billion in funds are expected to go to hospitals  to support health-care-related expenses or provide  relief for lost revenues. Finally, while they do not  show up in the CBO’s estimates of fiscal support, the  legislation provided up to $454 billion for the Treasury  Department to fund lending facilities established by  the Federal Reserve to offer loans to businesses as well  as state and local governments and provided up to  $46 billion to offer loans to the airline industry. Direct Government Purchases and Aid to  State and Local Governments: $260 billion The largest part of this aid category consists of  about $150 billion in relief funding to state and local  governments for expenses related to dealing with the  COVID-19 pandemic. State governments will also  receive an extra $30 billion through a temporary  increase in the share of Medicaid expenditures that  the federal government covers. In addition, the Federal  Emergency Management Agency is expected to spend  $50 billion in disaster relief funds to provide assistance  to individuals and organizations affected by the  COVID-19 crisis. Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis Small businesses employ nearly half of U.S. private sector workers, play key roles in local communities,  and provide income to millions of business owners.  The COVID-19 pandemic poses acute risks to the  survival of many small businesses. Widespread failure  of small businesses would create economic insecurity  for millions of workers and business owners, slow  down the economic recovery, and alter the economic  landscape of local communities. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies are making  aggressive efforts to support small businesses. More than 99 percent of U.S. fi rms have fewer than  500 employees, and almost 90 percent have fewer  than 20 employees. Altogether, businesses with fewer  than 500 employees account for almost half of private sector jobs.  Small businesses and small nonprofit  organizations are particularly prevalent in service  industries and include examples such as car dealers,  restaurants, barber shops, medical offices, legal offices,  home repair contractors, and religious organizations.  These businesses and organizations are part of the  economic and social landscape of local communities  and neighborhoods. Small businesses are also prevalent  in manufacturing supply chain industries.  Moreover,  the businesses that spur innovation, contribute to  nationwide job and productivity growth, and turn into  large household names typically start out as small  businesses. Small businesses are particularly vulnerable to social  distancing for two main reasons. First, small businesses  are prevalent in sectors that have seen especially large  declines in revenue due to social distancing; small  businesses make up about 60 percent of employment  in the “leisure and hospitality” sector and about  85 percent of employment in the “other services” sector  (which includes assorted neighborhood fixtures like  churches and beauty salons). Second, small fi rms tend  to be more financially constrained than larger fi rms.  For example, bank account data suggest that roughly  half of small businesses entered the COVID-19 crisis  with cash reserves sufficient for fewer than 15 days of  operations without revenue.  Moreover, even under  normal circumstances, many small fi rms face financial  challenges and lack access to liquid financial markets,  relying instead on bank loans, credit cards, and the  personal resources of owners. A wide variety of data reveal an alarming picture  of small business health during the COVID-19 crisis.  Surveys of small businesses suggest that pessimism  about business viability is prevalent.  The majority of  small businesses have seen revenue losses, and half of small businesses do not expect to return to their usual  level of operations within the next six months.7 Employment declines have been deeper among  small businesses than among larger businesses.  Moreover, the share of total job losses  accounted for by small businesses stopping paycheck  issuance entirely (that is, going inactive) is substantial.  Data from Homebase, a  provider of scheduling and time sheet services for small  local businesses, show that between 30 and 40 percent  of establishments in sectors deeply affected by social  distancing have gone inactive since February 15.9  Data  from Womply, a provider of credit card transaction  processing services, suggest that spending at small  restaurants was down 80 percent (versus a year earlier)  by early April and was still down 50 percent in early  June. Taken together, these data suggest considerable  risk of failure for a large number of small businesses. The inflow of new businesses (which are typically  small businesses) also plummeted. The Census Bureau reports that, in late March,  applications for new employer business tax identifiers  were down more than 40 percent relative to a year earlier; the series has only gradually recovered and  was still just below last year’s pace as of late May.  Business entry is a key contributor to job creation; with  business exits and associated job destruction likely to  be elevated during the COVID-19 episode, new fi rm  creation is even more important than usual. The Congress, the Federal Reserve, and other federal  agencies have acted swiftly to help address the risk  of widespread small business failure. As part of the  CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic  Security Act), the Congress created the Paycheck  Protection Program (PPP) to provide small businesses  with funds to retain employees for roughly two months.  The Federal Reserve is bolstering the effectiveness  of the PPP through the Paycheck Protection Program  Liquidity Facility, which extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans. About  three-fourths of small businesses with employees have  applied for PPP assistance, suggesting the program  is extremely valuable and timely, and a large share  of these applications have been approved; however,  some industries may face an ongoing need after the  program expires. The Federal Reserve is also supporting lending  to small businesses through the Term Asset-Backed  Securities Loan Facility, which lends to holders of,  among others, securities backed by loans guaranteed  by the Small Business Administration. In addition, the  Federal Reserve has established the Main Street Lending  Program (MSLP), which features a range of facilities  designed to provide support to small and medium-sized fi rms. Small businesses make vital contributions to labor  markets and their local communities, and a critical  subset of small businesses are young, innovative fi rms  with the potential to create many jobs and increase  overall productivity. The nature of the economic  recovery that follows the COVID-19 crisis will depend  in part on the survival of small businesses. Small  business failures not only destroy jobs, but also erase  the productive knowledge within the fi rms, deplete  the assets of business owners, alter the character of  communities and neighborhoods, and, in some cases,  deprive the country of innovations. The Federal Reserve  will continue to monitor the conditions of small  businesses and support this fundamental segment of  the economy. Developments Related to Financial Stability The COVID-19 pandemic has abruptly halted large  swaths of economic activity and led to swift financial  repercussions. Despite increased resilience from the  financial and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably those  associated with liquidity and maturity transformation  in the nonbank financial sector—have amplified some  of the economic effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected to be  significant in the near term. This discussion reviews  vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system at the  onset of the pandemic and describes some of the  extraordinary measures taken by the Federal Reserve to  mitigate the brunt of the shock. At the onset of the pandemic, asset valuation  pressures in the United States were elevated. Spreads,  risk premiums, and implied volatility were at the low  ends of their historical distributions among several  large asset categories, including domestic equities  and corporate bonds. Beginning in late February,  expectations for global economic growth plummeted  and uncertainty increased sharply, driving down  risky asset prices and putting downward pressure on  Treasury yields. Equity prices plunged as concern over  the COVID-19 outbreak grew and volatility surged to  extreme levels. Trading conditions became impaired  across several markets, posing significant challenges  to price discovery and increasing trading costs.  yields on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened to the highest levels since  the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Leveraged loan  spreads also widened, especially for lower-rated loans.  Since late March, however, investors’ tolerance for  risk increased somewhat following interventions by  the Federal Reserve; subsequently, risky asset prices  partially retraced their course and market functioning  improved. While the data on real estate prices mostly  predate the COVID-19 outbreak, commercial real  estate markets, in particular, had elevated valuation  pressures at the beginning of 2020, making them  vulnerable to significant price declines stemming from  the unfolding effects of the pandemic. On the eve of the pandemic, vulnerabilities  associated with total private-sector debt stood at  a moderate level relative to their historical norms.  However, this assessment masks differences across the  business and household sectors. Household borrowing  advanced more slowly than overall economic activity  and remained heavily concentrated among borrowers  with high credit scores. By contrast, business debt levels were high relative to either business assets  or gross domestic product, with the riskiest fi rms  accounting for most of the increase in debt in recent  years. Against this backdrop, the COVID-19 outbreak  poses severe risks to businesses and millions of  households. For businesses, as economic activity  continues to contract, the related reduction in earnings  and additional debt needed to bridge the downturn  will increase the debt burden and default risk. For  households, the sudden and outsized increase in  unemployment and sharp decline in family incomes  may give rise to widespread delinquencies and defaults. In the financial sector, banks, as of the fourth quarter  of 2019, were well capitalized relative to historical  levels, in part due to the regulatory reforms enacted  after the GFC. To date, banks have been able to meet  surging demand for draws on credit lines while also  building loan loss reserves to absorb higher expected  defaults. Leverage at broker-dealers changed little in  the second half of 2019 and remained at historically  low levels. However, in March, constraints on dealers’  intermediation capacity, including internal risk management practices and regulatory constraints on  the bank holding companies under which many dealers  operate, were cited as possible reasons for deteriorating  liquidity in even usually liquid markets. Leverage at  life insurance companies has reached post-2008 highs.  Moreover, the capitalization of the life insurance sector  is likely to deteriorate in coming quarters because  of lower-than-expected asset valuations and lower  long-term interest rates. Some measures suggest that  hedge fund leverage continued to expand through  the end of 2019. Higher leverage left hedge funds  vulnerable to asset price declines and to the increase in  market volatility accompanying the COVID-19 shock.  The subsequent deleveraging by hedge funds likely  contributed to market dislocations in February  and March. Funding markets proved less fragile than during  the 2007–09 episode in the face of the COVID-19  outbreak and the associated financial market turmoil.  The subdued reliance of large bank holding companies  on short-term funding and their robust holdings of high quality liquid assets have prevented any considerable  stress in the banking sector. Nonetheless, significant  strains emerged and emergency Federal Reserve  actions were required to stabilize short-term funding  markets. Recent growth in prime money market mutual  funds (MMFs) and large holdings of corporate debt by other mutual funds increased the vulnerabilities in  the financial system. These vulnerabilities produced  considerable strains in March as asset prices fell and  investors became more risk averse. Prime MMFs and  bond mutual funds experienced significant outflows  in March, leading to severe strains in markets funded  by these institutions—notably, commercial paper (CP)  and corporate bond markets. The tensions began to  ease only after the Federal Reserve took several actions  targeted at these markets, as will be discussed. The outlook for the pandemic and economic activity  is uncertain. In the near term, risks associated with  the course of COVID-19 and its effects on the U.S.  and global economies remain high. In addition, there  is potential for stresses to interact with preexisting  vulnerabilities stemming from financial system or fiscal  weaknesses in Europe, China, and emerging market  economies. In turn, these risks have the potential  to interact with the vulnerabilities identified in this  discussion and produce additional strains for the U.S.  financial system. Facilities to Support the Economy since the  COVID-19 Outbreak The Federal Reserve, with the approval of the  Secretary of the Treasury, established new credit and  liquidity facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal  Reserve Act to alleviate severe dislocations that arose in  a number of financial markets and to support the flow  of credit to households and businesses.  These actions  fall into two categories: stabilizing short-term funding  markets and providing more direct support for the  extension of credit across the economy. As investors moved rapidly toward cash and the  most liquid assets, an acute liquidity squeeze emerged  in short-term funding markets in mid-March. In the  CP market, funding dried up even for companies in  good financial standing. At the same time, investors  contributed to the stress by starting to pull away from  some prime MMFs, which typically hold CP and other  highly liquid, short-term debt instruments. In response,  the Federal Reserve set up the Commercial Paper  Funding Facility, for which the Treasury Department has  provided $10 billion of credit protection. In addition, the Federal Reserve established the Money Market  Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), for which the  Treasury Department will provide up to $10 billion of  credit protection. The Federal Reserve established a  companion facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility,  to provide loans against high-quality collateral to  primary dealers that are critical intermediaries in short-term funding markets. The announcement of these  facilities strongly affected the targeted markets. After  an initial wave of borrowing from the facilities, market  strains eased and the use of these facilities has abated. To provide more direct support for credit across  the economy, the Federal Reserve established a  number of facilities in March and April. The Treasury’s  equity investments in many of these facilities were  authorized by the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief,  and Economic Security Act). Together, these facilities  will support the flow of up to $2.6 trillion of credit to  large employers, small and medium-sized businesses,  households, and state and local governments. The  Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF)  and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility  (SMCCF) were established to support employment  and spending of large, investment-grade businesses.  Following the announcement of the PMCCF and the  SMCCF, spreads of both investment- and speculative grade corporate bonds declined notably, and issuance  of investment-grade corporate bonds strengthened. To  support the longer-term, market-based financing that is  critical to real economic activity, the Federal Reserve  reestablished the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan  Facility to purchase securities backed by auto loans,  equipment leases, credit card loans, and other lending.  The Municipal Liquidity Facility was set up to help  U.S. state and local governments manage cash flow  pressures by providing credit secured through their  short-term obligations. The Federal Reserve established  the Main Street Lending Program to provide up to  $600 billion in four-year loans for small and medium-sized businesses that were in good financial standing  before the pandemic. Finally, the Paycheck Protection  Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) was established to  bolster the effectiveness of the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) of the Small Business Administration.  The CARES Act created the PPP program to provide  loans that can help small businesses keep their workers  on payrolls. The PPPLF extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans, taking the  loans as collateral. The Federal Reserve is deeply committed to  transparency and recognizes that the need for  transparency is heightened when it is called upon  to use its emergency powers. Transparency helps  promote the accountability of the Federal Reserve to  the Congress and the public. Specifically, the Board  of Governors will report substantial amounts of  information on a monthly basis for the liquidity and  lending facilities using CARES Act funding as well  as for the PPPLF, including the names and details of  participants in each facility; amounts borrowed and  interest rate charged; and overall costs, revenues, and  fees for each facility. For the few programs that are  targeting financial mark et functioning, the Federal  Reserve will provide a full accounting of transactions  in these facilities. Real-time disclosure would risk  stigmatizing participation in these facilities and  undermining the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide  assurance that these systemically important markets  will continue their critical function in times of severe  market stress. The delay in disclosure will be no longer  than necessary to ensure that participants do not  hesitate to participate. While the facilities are operating,  the Federal Reserve will disclose extensive and regular  aggregate information on total borrowing, collateral  and fees, and interest income. Tools to Lessen Strains in Dollar  Funding Markets The Federal Reserve has taken actions to help  maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and  businesses by reducing financial stresses abroad, which  can spill over into U.S. credit markets. The Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity swap lines improve liquidity  conditions in dollar funding markets in the United  States and abroad by providing foreign central banks  with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to  institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market  stress. These swap lines provide U.S. dollars to a foreign  central bank in exchange for the equivalent amount  of funds in that central bank’s currency based on the  market exchange rate at the time of the transaction. The  Federal Reserve and each participating foreign central  bank agree to swap back the same quantities of their  two currencies at a specified date in the future. During  the week of March 15, 2020, the network of swap lines  was expanded and enhanced by adding additional  central bank counterparties, lowering the price on the  lines, and increasing the frequency and maturity of  dollar operations. In addition to the swap line enhancements, on  March 31, the Federal Reserve announced a new  program to support dollar funding markets, the  temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary  Authorities) Repo Facility. This facility should help  support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury  market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars  to a broad range of countries, many of which do not  have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve.  Under this facility, FIMA account holders can enter  into overnight repurchase agreements (repos) with the  Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S. Treasury  securities they hold at the Federal Reserve for U.S.  dollars. The repos are overnight but can be rolled over  as needed. The facility reduces the need for central  banks to sell their Treasury securities outright, thus helping to avoid disruptions to the Treasury market and  upward pressure on yields. Since its inception, take-up  at the facility has been modest. Regulatory and Supervisory Actions to  Support the Economy since the COVID-19  Outbreak The Federal Reserve has also made several  adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory regime  to facilitate market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected by  COVID-19. These actions fall into the following four  categories: 1. acceleration of previously planned, permanent  adjustments to certain regulatory requirements  to address specific impediments to market  functioning 2. provision of additional time for banking  organizations to phase in new regulatory  requirements 3. temporary relaxation of certain regulatory  requirements or requirements imposing  supervisory burden 4. supervisory statements encouraging banks to  support those affected by COVID-19  The first category includes changing the def nition  of eligible retained income to ensure capital and total  loss-absorbing capacity buffers function as intended;  allowing early adoption of a new method for certain  banking organizations to measure counterparty credit risk derivatives contracts; reducing reserve requirement  ratios to zero; and amending Regulation D (Reserve  Requirements of Depository Institutions) to delete the  six-per-month limit on convenience transfers from  the “savings deposit” definition. The second category  includes allowing certain banking organizations  additional time to delay the effects of the Current  Expected Credit Losses accounting standard in their  regulatory capital and extending the initial compliance  with the Single-Counterparty Credit Limit rule by  18 months. The third category includes excluding  Treasury securities and reserves from the supplementary  leverage ratio denominator; modifying the liquidity  and capital rules to allow banking organizations to  neutralize the regulatory effects of participating in the  PPPLF and MMLF programs; introducing a change to  support the favorable treatment of term primary credit  loans from the discount window under the liquidity  rules; providing temporary waivers to banks for limits  on transactions with nonbank affiliates that offer  credit and intermediation; temporarily lowering the  community bank leverage ratio to 8 percent; giving  banks flexibility in the timing of regulatory reports; and  granting mortgage servicers flexibility to work with  struggling consumers affected by COVID-19. Finally,  the fourth category includes encouraging banks to use  their capital and liquidity buffers to work constructively  with borrowers and to make short-term loan  modifications on a good faith basis, as well as  encouraging lenders to offer responsible small-dollar  loans to consumers and small businesses and to support  low- and moderate-income borrowers through loans  and banking fee waivers. Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Economies Authorities in foreign economies have announced a  wide array of fiscal, monetary, and regulatory measures  to mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Many foreign governments have enacted sizable  fiscal packages to address the sudden loss of income by  fi rms and households, with a special focus on the most  vulnerable groups, such as low-income individuals, the  unemployed, and small and medium-sized enterprises.  The size of the support is, on average, considerably  larger in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) than in  emerging market economies (EMEs), as many EME  governments have more limited fiscal space. The measures targeted at fi rms aim to keep them  afloat in the near term, with the hope of preserving  businesses until demand returns. Such measures  include loans at favorable terms and loan guarantees;  deferrals of taxes and social security contributions;  tax breaks and cash transfers, especially for small  and medium-sized enterprises; and targeted  sectoral support. For households, the measures aim  to provide income to those in need and alleviate  payment difficulties. These policies include increased  unemployment and pension payments, mortgage  deferrals, accelerated transfer payments, and direct  cash payments. In addition, several AFEs and some  Asian emerging economies have adopted large direct  wage subsidies to keep workers on fi rms’ payrolls.  Such measures may help limit dislocations in the labor  markets of these countries by subsidizing a significant  reduction in hours worked. The hope of these programs  is that workers’ continued attachment to their fi rms will  preserve human capital and make it readily available to  the fi rms during the recovery that follows the crisis. Many central banks have reduced their policy  rates—often to or near their effective lower  bounds—and have taken substantial actions to start  or expand asset purchases and to support the flow of  credit. Although central banks acted quickly to lower  interest rates, some policymakers in the EMEs expressed  concerns about intensifying capital outflows, while a few AFE central banks worried about the potential harm  to banks’ financial health. Several AFE central banks have purchased  government debt in response to the crisis. These  purchases have been primarily aimed at restoring  market functioning and providing liquidity, but the  purchases have also eased financial conditions by  lowering long-term yields. The Bank of England  (BOE) restarted its purchases of gilts, and the Swedish  Riks bank increased the pace of its existing program.  The European Central Bank (ECB) and the Reserve  Bank of New Zealand introduced and expanded asset  purchase programs. The Reserve Bank of Australia  (RBA) began bond purchases to target the three-year government bond yield at 0.25 percent, the same as its  overnight rate. Some central banks, such as the Bank  of Canada (BOC) and the RBA, have started purchases  of provincial and state bonds to support liquidity in  those markets. To ensure the smooth transmission of  its monetary actions, the ECB has used its flexibility  to weight its purchases more heavily toward bonds of  euro-area member states that face higher yields. Monetary authorities have also adopted policies  to sustain the provision of credit to businesses and  households during the pandemic. Central banks have  purchased a variety of private assets, thus directly  addressing distress in funding markets and helping  ease financial conditions for fi rms. These assets include  corporate bonds purchased by the BOE, ECB, and Bank  of Japan (BOJ); commercial paper bought by the BOC,  BOE, BOJ, and Riks bank; and exchange-traded funds  and real estate investment trusts purchased by the BOJ.  These actions have significantly expanded the balance  sheets of major foreign central banks. Some  central banks in EMEs have also begun purchasing  private assets, with the central banks of Chile and  Colombia buying bank bonds. Several central banks have also activated funding for-lending facilities to provide relatively inexpensive  funding to banks as long as they maintain defined  lending benchmarks, in some cases with extra  incentives to lend to small and medium-sized  enterprises. The BOE, BOJ, ECB, RBA, Riks bank, and  Bank of Korea currently have such programs. Regulators in a number of foreign economies  have introduced various measures that provide relief  for banks to help sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to lend to  the economy. These measures include temporarily  easing capital requirements, such as the reduction— and, in some cases, elimination—of conservation  and countercyclical capital buffers; deferring  the implementation of new, stricter Basel capital  requirements; temporarily easing liquidity requirements (for example, in France, Germany, and the United  Kingdom); and giving banks and their supervisors  more flexibility in dealing with nonperforming loans  (for example, the ECB). In addition, some regulators  have temporarily excluded central bank reserves and  certain safe assets from the calculation of leverage  exposures. Some foreign regulators are considering the  reduction or even elimination of risk weights on new  loans guaranteed by the government. Regulators also  emphasize that banks should continue to apply sound  underwriting standards and conduct solid capital and  liquidity planning and robust risk management. Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets Deterioration in Market Functioning in  February and March Between late February and early March, functioning  in U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets became increasingly  strained. Amid growing concerns about the economic  implications of COVID-19, investors sought to sell large  volumes of long-maturity Treasury securities and MBS  and reallocate their portfolios into shorter-term, more  liquid assets. While the yields on long-maturity Treasury  securities initially dropped sharply, in mid-March they  started to increase in the face of these strong selling  pressures. Around the same time as the  increase in long-maturity Treasury yields, the spreads  between yields on MBS and Treasury securities of  comparable duration widened sharply. Indications of  severe dislocations in both markets were also present.  For example, bid-ask spreads for Treasury securities  and agency MBS widened significantly. One factor that may explain these market  dislocations is the effect of widespread selling of  Treasury securities and MBS to primary dealers, who  intermediate a large proportion of trading in these  markets. As a wide range of domestic and foreign  investors (including foreign official investors) rushed  to raise cash or rebalance their portfolios by selling  assets, dealers took large amounts of less liquid securities, including off-the-run Treasury securities  and agency MBS, onto their balance sheets. At  the same time, mortgage refinancing picked up,  prompting substantial turnover in the MBS market.  By early March, some dealers had reportedly run  into balance sheet constraints that hampered their  ability to purchase additional securities, leading to a  deterioration in the functioning of a number of dealer-intermediated markets. In the market for Treasury securities, liquidity  conditions were particularly poor for more seasoned, or  “off the run,” securities. However, the most liquid parts  of the market, where newly issued, or “on the run,”  securities are traded electronically, saw unprecedented  strains: The volume of posted quotes, or “market  depth,” dropped sharply, while intraday bid-ask spreads  were exceptionally volatile, particularly for the longest maturity securities. These strains in the most liquid part  of the market suggest that principal trading fi rms— market participants who specialize in high-frequency  and automated intermediation—were significantly less  active than usual. Federal Reserve Policy Actions The disruptions to the functioning of the Treasury  and MBS markets were notable in view of the status of these markets as cornerstones for the operation  of the U.S. and global financial systems and for the  transmission of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve  therefore took a series of policy measures designed  to ensure the smooth functioning of these markets.  These measures included the expansion of repurchase  operations, an increase in purchases of Treasury and  agency MBS securities, the expansion of financing  arrangements for primary dealers, and a temporary  change to the regulatory capital requirements of bank  holding companies and depository institutions. Beginning March 9, 2020, following a directive  from the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the  Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Open Market Desk  increased the size of overnight and term repurchase  operations in order to ensure that the supply of reserves  remained ample and to support the smooth functioning  of the markets in which primary dealers obtain a  substantial proportion of their short-term funding. These changes expanded the supply of short-term  funding available to primary dealers to fi nance their  increased holdings of Treasury securities and agency  MBS at a time when funding costs from other sources  were increasing. Further, on March 12, the Desk  introduced new weekly recurring one- and three-month  term repurchase agreement (repo) operations of up  to $500 billion to address the disruption in Treasury  financing markets.  Finally, on March 16, the Desk  introduced a second daily overnight repo operation and  increased the amount offered in each to $500 billion. Usage of Federal Reserve repo operations peaked on  March 17, with overnight and term repo outstanding  of $496 billion, and has since fallen to $167 billion  as funding strains have eased. In light of more stable  repo market conditions, on May 4, the Desk returned  to once daily overnight repo operations.  Further, on  May 14, the Desk discontinued its three-month term  repo operations. Despite the much larger volume of repo operations  during the week of March 9, strains in Treasury and  agency MBS markets continued to build. Beginning in  mid-March, therefore, the FOMC directed the Desk to  purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS in order  to support smooth market functioning. On March 15,  the FOMC directed the Desk to increase its holdings  of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and of  agency MBS by at least $200 billion, with purchases  to take place across maturities.  To provide greater  flexibility in addressing the strains, on March 23,  the FOMC authorized purchases of these securities  in the amounts needed to support smooth market  functioning and effective transmission of monetary  policy to broader financial conditions. The securities  targeted for purchase were also expanded to include  agency commercial MBS. Since mid-March, the  Desk has purchased approximately $1.6 trillion and  $719 billion of Treasury securities and agency MBS,  respectively.  The daily amounts of purchases peaked at  approximately $75 billion and $41 billion for Treasury  securities and agency MBS, respectively, in late March  before being reduced in stages to the current average  daily amounts of around $4.0 billion for Treasury  securities and $4.5 billion for agency MBS (including  reinvestments). These purchases helped reduce  financial market volatility by providing a predictable  source of demand for these securities and by taking up  some of the inventories from dealers’ balance sheets. On March 17, the Board, with the approval of the  U.S. Treasury Secretary, established the Primary Dealer  Credit Facility (PDCF) to provide primary dealers  with access to term funding against a broad range of  collateral.  The PDCF helped alleviate funding pressures  faced by primary dealers by allowing them to source  financing more easily for their increased securities  holdings. The amount of PDCF loans outstanding  peaked at around $35 billion in mid-April but has since  declined to around $6 billion. On March 31, the Federal Reserve announced the  establishment of the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility to  allow FIMA account holders, which consist of central  banks and other international monetary authorities  with accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New  York, to exchange their Treasury securities for U.S.  dollars.  This facility allows foreign official institutions  to raise U.S. dollars, if needed, without having to sell  Treasury securities in the open market during periods  of heightened volatility or impaired market functioning.  Since its inception, take-up of the facility has been  modest, as stresses in the U.S. Treasury market have  declined. On April 1, the Federal Reserve released an interim  final rule indicating that holdings of U.S. Treasury  securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks by  bank holding companies would be excluded from the  calculation of the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR)  until March 31, 2021.10 Further, on May 15, 2020,  the federal bank regulatory agencies (the Board of  Governors, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,  and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) released  an interim final rule allowing depository institutions  that are subject to the SLR the option to similarly  exclude U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal  Reserve Banks from their SLR calculations through  March 31, 2021.11 These temporary exemptions are  expected to ease liquidity pressures for primary dealers  and depository institutions subject to these leverage  ratios by providing them with greater flexibility to  intermediate trades with clients in the presence of  temporarily larger inventories of Treasury securities. Improvements in Market Functioning Since the announcement of these policy actions,  trading conditions in the markets for Treasury securities  and MBS have improved steadily. The purchases of  Treasury securities and agency MBS contributed to  the subsequent decline in primary dealers’ inventories.  Bid-ask spreads have narrowed, particularly  in the case of on-the-run Treasury securities, while MBS  spreads have also come down from their peaks in mid-March. In addition to the Federal Reserve’s actions, the  passage of the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Re lief, and  Economic Security Act), together with an improvement  in sentiment among investors regarding the economic  implications of COVID-19, likely contributed to the  improvement in market functioning. In late May, these  inventories temporarily increased to levels previously  seen in March, largely because of increased dealer  holdings of Treasury bills. However, Treasury markets  did not exhibit a recurrence of the notable strains in  trading conditions witnessed earlier this year. Although trading conditions have improved  substantially since mid-March, bid-ask spreads for  longer-maturity and off-the-run Treasury securities  remain wider than in mid-February. Market depth  for on-the-run securities remains low, particularly for  longer-maturity securities. MBS market functioning and  liquidity have largely returned to pre-February norms,  though strains remain in some less liquid parts of  the market. Developments on the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet The Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance  Sheet Has Increased Considerably In response to the financial and economic  disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the  Federal Reserve has eased the stance of monetary  policy and has deployed various tools to promote  smooth functioning of financial markets and the fl ow  of credit to households and businesses. This discussion  reviews the implications of these actions for the Federal  Reserve’s balance sheet. To support the smooth functioning of those  credit markets that are critical for the economy, the  Federal Reserve purchased Treasury securities and  agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed  securities (MBS), expanded repurchase agreement  (repo) operations, and introduced several credit and  liquidity facilities. As a result of these actions, the size  of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from  $4.2 trillion at the beginning of 2020, approximately  19 percent of U.S. nominal gross domestic product  (GDP), to $7.2 trillion in June 2020, approximately  33 percent of U.S. nominal GDP.  The $3 trillion increase  in the size of the balance sheet was driven by asset  purchases and other extraordinary actions.  Open Market Operations, the Discount  Window, and U.S. Dollar Liquidity Swap Lines Since the beginning of 2020, System Open Market  Account holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS increased by $1,805 billion and $427 billion, respectively.  The markets for both Treasury securities  and agency MBS play a critical role in the U.S.  economy, and the Federal Reserve’s purchases have  fostered a substantial improvement in the functioning of  these markets and the conditions prevailing in them. Furthermore, to address strains in short-term U.S.  dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York’s Open Market Desk expanded its offerings  of overnight and term repo operations. The amount  of repos outstanding reached a peak of $442 billion  in mid-March. Subsequently, given the improvement  in funding market conditions, the Desk announced  several reductions in the frequency of repo operations.  As of June 3, all repos outstanding had declined to  $212 billion, lower than the amount outstanding early  in the year, amid substantial increases in reserves and  improved funding market conditions. On March 15, the Federal Reserve announced  changes to the discount window and encouraged  depository institutions to use the discount window to  meet unexpected funding needs and support the fl ow  of credit to households and businesses.  The changes  include lowering the primary credit rate by 150 basis  points to 0.25 percent and extending borrowing terms  for up to 90 days. The total outstanding discount  window primary credit borrowing peaked at around  $51 billion in late March and has since declined  to $11 billion in June. Furthermore, the Federal  Reserve maintains standing dollar liquidity swap line  agreements with the central banks of several countries  and instituted temporary agreements with the central  banks of additional countries. After initially ramping up  to $439 billion in March and April, the total agreements  outstanding stayed mostly fl at in May to reach  $447 billion as of June 3. Lending Programs and Liquidity Facilities  under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act In addition to the open market operations and  initiatives described earlier, the Federal Reserve further  expanded measures to enhance liquidity and the fl ow  of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Under the  authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act,  with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the  Federal Reserve Board implemented various measures  in response to intensified stresses in several markets. The combined size of the Money Market Mutual  Fund Liquidity Facility and the Primary Dealer Credit  Facility increased to $86 billion in April, but the size  of the facilities declined to $36 billion by June 3. The  combined size of other facilities, such as the Paycheck  Protection Program Lending Facility, the Commercial  Paper Funding Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate  Credit Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility,  has been steadily rising and reached $65 billion as of  June 3. The Expansion of Total Assets Led to Higher  Reserve Balances Held by Depository  Institutions The increase in the Federal Reserve’s assets led to  a commensurate increase in the size of liabilities on  the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The expansion  of total assets from the outright purchases and other actions resulted in reserve balances of $3.3 trillion, an  increase of $1.7 trillion from the beginning of the year.  Additionally, several non-reserve liabilities increased.  In March and April, Federal Reserve notes grew faster  than normal, partially in response to the COVID-19  pandemic, and reached $1.9 trillion, an increase of  $144 billion from the beginning of the year. Furthermore, the U.S. Treasury’s General Account  (TGA) at the Federal Reserve, which the Treasury uses  to receive taxes and proceeds of Treasury auctions  and to process the government’s outlays, increased  substantially. At the beginning of 2020, the TGA  balance was approximately $400 billion. In preparation  for the fiscal spending related to the CARES Act  (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act)  and other stimulus measures, the TGA balance reached  a high of $1.4 trillion on June 3. 
Summary The COVID-19 pandemic continues to weigh heavily on economic activity and labor markets in the United States and around the world, even as the ongoing vaccination campaigns offer hope for a return to more normal conditions later this year. While unprecedented fiscal and monetary stimulus and a relaxation of rigorous social-distancing restrictions supported a rapid rebound in the U.S. labor market last summer, the pace of gains has slowed and employment remains well below pre-pandemic levels. In addition, weak aggregate demand and low oil prices have held down consumer price inflation. In this challenging environment, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has held its policy rate near zero and has continued to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to support the economic recovery. These measures, along with the Committee’s strong guidance on interest rates and the balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Economic and Financial Developments Economic activity and the labor market. The initial wave of COVID-19 infections led to a historic contraction in economic activity as a result of both mandatory restrictions and voluntary changes in behavior by households and businesses. The level of gross domestic product (GDP) fell a cumulative 10 percent over the first half of 2020, and the measured unemployment rate spiked to a post–World War II high of 14.8 percent in April. As mandatory restrictions were subsequently relaxed and households and firms adapted to pandemic conditions, many sectors of the economy recovered rapidly and unemployment fell back. Momentum slowed substantially in the late fall and early winter, however, as spending on many services contracted again amid a worsening of the pandemic. All told, GDP is currently estimated to have declined 2.5 percent over the four quarters of last year and payroll employment in January was almost 10 million jobs below pre-pandemic levels, while the unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.3 percent and the labor force participation rate was severely depressed. Job losses have been most severe and unemployment remains particularly elevated among Hispanics, African Americans, and other minority groups as well as those who hold lower-wage jobs. Inflation. After declining sharply as the pandemic struck, consumer price inflation rebounded along with economic activity, but inflation remains below pre-COVID levels and the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. The 12-month measure of PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation was 1.3 percent in December, while the measure that excludes food and energy items—so-called core inflation, which is typically less volatile than total inflation—was 1.5 percent. Both total and core inflation were held down in part by prices for services adversely affected by the pandemic, and indicators of longer-run inflation expectations are now at similar levels to those seen in recent years. Financial conditions. Financial conditions have improved notably since the spring of last year and remain generally accommodative. Low interest rates, the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases, the establishment of emergency lending facilities, and other extraordinary actions, together with fiscal policy, continued to support the flow of credit in the economy and smooth market functioning. The nominal Treasury yield curve steepened and equity prices continued to increase steadily in the second half of last year as concerns over the resurgence in COVID-19 cases appeared to have been outweighed by positive news about vaccine prospects and expectations of further fiscal support. Spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed significantly, partly because the credit quality of firms improved and market functioning remained stable. Mortgage rates for households remain near historical lows. However, financing conditions remain relatively tight for households with low credit scores and for small businesses. Financial stability. While some financial vulnerabilities have increased since the start of the pandemic, the institutions at the core of the financial system remain resilient. Asset valuation pressures have returned to or exceeded pre-pandemic levels in most markets, including in equity, corporate bond, and residential real estate markets. Although government programs have supported business and household incomes, some businesses and households have become more vulnerable to shocks, as earnings have fallen and borrowing has risen. Strong capital positions before the pandemic helped banks absorb large losses related to the pandemic. Financial institutions, however, may experience additional losses as a result of rising defaults in the coming years, and long-standing vulnerabilities at money market mutual funds and open-end investment funds remain unaddressed. Although some facilities established by the Federal Reserve in the wake of the pandemic have expired, those remaining continue to serve as important backstops against further stress.  International developments. Mirroring the United States, economic activity abroad bounced back last summer after the spread of the virus moderated and restrictions eased. Subsequent infections and renewed restrictions have again depressed economic activity, however. Relative to the spring, the current slowdown in economic activity has been less dramatic. Fiscal and monetary policies continue to be supportive, and people have adapted to containment measures that have often been less stringent than earlier. Despite the resurgence of the pandemic in many economies, financial markets abroad have recovered since the spring, buoyed by continued strong fiscal and monetary policy support and the start of vaccination campaigns in many countries. With the abatement of financial stress, the broad dollar has depreciated, more than reversing its appreciation at the onset of the pandemic. On balance, global equity prices have recovered and sovereign credit spreads in emerging market economies and in the European periphery have narrowed. In major advanced economies, sovereign yields remained near historical low levels amid continued monetary policy accommodation. Monetary Policy Review of the strategic framework for monetary policy. The Federal Reserve concluded the review of its strategic framework for monetary policy in the second half of 2020. The review was motivated by changes in the U.S. economy that affect monetary policy, including the global decline in the general level of interest rates and the reduced sensitivity of inflation to labor market tightness. In August, the FOMC issued a revised Statement on LongerRun Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.  The revised statement acknowledges the changes in the economy over recent decades and articulates how policymakers are taking these changes into account in conducting monetary policy. In the revised statement, the Committee indicates that it aims to attain its statutory goals by seeking to eliminate shortfalls from maximum employment—a broad-based and inclusive goal—and achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. Achieving inflation that averages 2 percentover time helps ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at the FOMC’s longer-run 2 percent objective. Hence, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. In addition, in December the FOMC introduced two changes to the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) intended to enhance the information provided to the public. First, the release of the full set of SEP exhibits was accelerated by three weeks, from the publication of the minutes three weeks after the end of an FOMC meeting to the day of the policy decision, the second day of an FOMC meeting. Second, new charts were included that display how FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainties and risks have evolved over time. Interest rate policy. In light of the effects of the continuing public health crisis on the economy and the associated risks to the outlook, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent since last March. In pursuing the strategy outlined in its revised statement, the Committee noted that it expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Balance sheet policy. With the federal funds rate near zero, the Federal Reserve has also continued to undertake asset purchases to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by $40 billion per month. These purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Committee expects these purchases to continue at least at this pace until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum-employment and pricestability goals. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee is prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Special Topics Disparities in job loss. The COVID-19 crisis has exacerbated pre-existing disparities in labor market outcomes across job types and demographic groups. Job losses last spring were disproportionately severe among lowerwage workers, less-educated workers, and racial and ethnic minorities, as in previous recessions, but also among women, in contrast to previous recessions. While all groups have experienced at least a partial recovery in employment rates since April 2020, the shortfall in employment remains especially large for lower-wage workers and for Hispanics, African Americans, and other minority groups, and the additional childcare burdens resulting from school closures have weighed more heavily on women’s labor force participation than on men’s labor force participation. High-frequency indicators. The unprecedented magnitude, speed, and nature of the COVID-19 shock to the economy rendered traditional statistics insufficient for monitoring economic activity in a timely manner. As a result, policymakers turned to nontraditional high-frequency indicators of activity, especially for the labor market and consumer spending. These indicators presented a more timely and granular picture of the drop and subsequent rebound in economic activity last spring. The most recent readings obtained from those indicators suggest that economic activity began to edge up again in January, likely reflecting in part the disbursement of additional stimulus payments to households.  Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which relate a policy interest rate to a small number of other economic variables, can provide useful guidance to policymakers. This discussion presents the policy rate prescriptions from a number of rules that have received attention in the research literature, many of which mechanically prescribe raising the federal funds rate as employment rises above estimates of its longer-run level. A rule that instead responds only to shortfalls of employment from assessments of its maximum level is featured to illustrate one aspect of the FOMC’s revised approach to policy, as described in the revised Statement on LongerRun Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Part 1 Recent Economic and Financial DevelopmentsDomestic Developments The labor market has partially recovered from the pandemic-induced collapse, but the pace of improvement slowed substantially toward the end of last year... The public health crisis spurred by the spread of COVID-19 weighed on economic activity throughout 2020, and patterns in the labor market reflected the ebb and flow of the virus and the actions taken by households, businesses, and governments to combat its spread. During the initial stage of the pandemic in March and April, payroll employment plunged by 22 million jobs, while the measured unemployment rate jumped to 14.8 percent—its highest level since the Great Depression. As cases subsided and early lockdowns were relaxed, payroll employment rebounded rapidly—particularly outside of the service sectors—and the unemployment rate fell back. Beginning late last year, however, the pace of improvement in the labor market slowed markedly amid another large wave of COVID-19 cases. The unemployment rate declined only 0.4 percentage point from November through January, while payroll gains averaged just 29,000 per month, weighed down by a contraction in the leisure and hospitality sector, which is particularly affected by social distancing and government-mandated restrictions. All told, the incomplete recovery left the level of employment in January almost 10 million lower than it was a year earlier, while the unemployment rate stood at 6.3 percent— nearly 3 percentage points higher than before the onset of the pandemic. Most recently, high-frequency data—including initial claims for unemployment insurance and weekly employment data from the payroll processor ADP—suggest modest further improvement in the labor market in recent weeks. (For more discussion of what high-frequency indicators are suggesting about the current trajectory of the economy, see the box “Monitoring Economic Activity with Nontraditional HighFrequency Indicators.”) . . . and the harm has been substantial The damage to the labor market has been even more substantial than is indicated by the extent of unemployment alone. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)—the share of the population that is either working or actively looking for work—plunged in March and April, as many of those who lost their jobs were not seeking work and so were not counted among the unemployed. Despite recovering some over the summer, the LFPR remains nearly 2 percentage points below its pre-pandemic leve. A number of factors appear to have contributed to the continued weakness in the LFPR, including a lack of job opportunities, the effects of school closings and virtual learning on parents’ ability to work, the health concerns of potential workers, and a spate of early retirements triggered by the crisis. All told, the employment-to-population ratio—the share of the population with jobs, regardless of the number seeking work—in January was 3.6 percentage points below the level at the beginning of 2020. Job losses last year fell most heavily on lower-wage workers and on Hispanics, African Americans, and other minority groups. As a result, the rise in unemployment and the decline in the employment-to-population ratio were particularly evident among those groups. Aggregate wage growth appears to be little changed despite the weakness in the labor market Although weakness in the labor market generally puts downward pressure on overall wages, the best available measures suggest that wage growth in 2020 was little changed from 2019. Total hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index, which includes both wages and benefits, rose 2.6 percent during the 12 months ending in December, only slightly below pre-pandemic rates. Wage growth as computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tracks the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey, was about 3½ percent during 2020, similar to the growth rate in 2019.3 The continued gains in aggregate wages mask important heterogeneity, however; according to the Atlanta Fed data, workers with lower earnings and nonwhites experienced larger decelerations in wages than other groups last year. Price inflation remains low despite rebounding since last spring As measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), inflation fell from 1.6 percent in December 2019 to a low of 0.5 percent in April, as economic activity dropped sharply. Since then, inflation has partially recovered along with the pickup in demand, but it was only 1.3 percent in December—still well below the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objective of 2 percent. After excluding consumer food and energy prices, which are often quite volatile, the 12-month measure of core PCE inflation was 1.5 percent in December. An alternative way to abstract from transitory influences on measured inflation is provided by the trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The 12-month change in this measure declined to 1.7 percent in December from 2 percent a year earlier, a similar decrease to those in total and core PCE inflation. The low level of consumer price inflation in 2020 partly reflected the deterioration in economic activity. For example, inflation in tenants’ rent and owners’ equivalent rent, which tend to be sensitive to overall economic conditions, softened in 2020 from the rates observed during the preceding few years. Low inflation also reflected the net effect of a number of pandemic-driven shifts in specific sectors of the economy, such as a decline in gasoline prices that resulted from a collapse in oil prices in the early part of the year, which only partially reversed in the second half. Similarly, airfares and hotel prices fell markedly, driven by huge reductions in demand due to the pandemic. In contrast, food prices increased at an unusually fast pace last year, given stronger demand at retail grocery stores and, at times, some pandemicrelated supply chain disruptions. In addition, prices for some durable goods, such as motor vehicles and home appliances, rose sharply during the summer and remained somewhat elevated at the end of the year, in part because of a pandemic-induced shift in demand away from services and toward these goods. Prices of imports and oil have also rebounded The partial rebound in inflation later in 2020 also stemmed from a firming of import prices. After declining in the first half of last year, nonfuel import prices increased in the second half, as the dollar depreciated and the recovery in global demand put upward pressure on non-oil commodity prices—a substantial component of nonfuel import prices. Prices of both agricultural commodities and industrial metals increased considerably, and nonfuel import prices are now higher than they were a year ago. Early in the pandemic, benchmark oil prices fell below $20 per barrel, a level not breached since 2002. While prices have now nearlyrecovered, oil consumption and production are still well below pre-pandemic levels. Although global economic activity has picked up since last spring, oil demand has not fully recovered, held back by the slow recovery in travel and commuting. Weak demand has been met by reductions in supply: U.S. production has fallen dramatically relative to a year ago, while OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and Russia have only slightly increased production after making sharp cuts last spring. Survey-based measures of long-run inflation expectations have been broadly stable . . . Despite the volatility in actual inflation last year, survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer-term horizons, which likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions, have been little changed on net. In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median value for inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years was 2.7 percent in January and early February. In the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents’ expected inflation rate three years ahead was 3.0 percent in January, somewhat above its year-earlier level. Finally, in the first-quarter Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price index over the next 10 years was 2.0 percent, close to the level around which it had typically hovered in previous years. . . . and market-based measures of inflation compensation have retraced earlier declines Inflation expectations can also be inferred from market-based measures of inflation compensation, although the inference is not straightforward because these measures are affected by changes in premiums that provide compensation for bearing inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of longer-term inflation compensation—derived either from differences between yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on comparable-maturity Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), or from inflation swaps—dropped sharply last March, partly reflecting a reduction in the relative liquidity of TIPS compared with nominal Treasury securities. Both measures rebounded in the next couple of months as liquidity improved, before drifting up further through the remainder of 2020 and early 2021. The TIPS-based measure of 5-to- 10-year-forward inflation compensation and the analogous measure from inflation swaps are now about 2¼ percent and 2½ percent, respectively, a bit above the average levels seen in 2019.5 The plunge and rebound in gross domestic product reflected unusual patterns of spending during the pandemic After contracting with unprecedented speed and severity in the first half of 2020, gross domestic product (GDP) rose rapidly in the third quarter and continued to pick up, albeit at a much slower pace, in the fourth quarter. The rebound in activity reflected a relaxation of voluntary and mandatory social distancing, as well as unprecedented fiscal and monetary support. Nevertheless, the recovery remains incomplete: At the end of 2020, GDP was 2.5 percent below its level four quarters earlier. This incomplete recovery reflected weakness in services consumption and overall exports that resulted largely from ongoing social-distancing measures to contain the virus, both at home and abroad. The concentration of the recession in services is unprecedented in the United States. Indeed, the sectors that are typically responsible for the cyclical dynamics of GDP have shown remarkable resilience: Activity in the housing market and consumer spending on goods were both above their pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter, and business fixed investment and manufacturing output also recovered rapidly from their initial plunges. Consumer spending, particularly on goods, bounced back in the second half of 2020 . . . Household consumption rebounded rapidly during the late spring and summer from its COVID-induced plunge, and it continued to make gains through the fourth quarter, ending the year 2.6 percent below its year-earlier level. Notably, purchases of both durable and nondurable goods rose above their preCOVID levels in the second half of 2020, as spending shifted away from services curtailed by voluntary and mandatory social distancing. Within durable goods, sales of light motor vehicles moved up quickly in the second half and are now close to their pre-pandemic level; any residual weakness in sales may be attributable to low supply, as production has failed to keep pace with demand. Services spending also rebounded from the extraordinarily low level seen in April, but it remained well below its pre-pandemic pace through the fourth quarter, as concerns about the virus continued to limit in-person interactions. Notably, consumer sentiment has also remained well below pre-pandemic levels. ... assisted by government income support... Consumer spending has been bolstered by government income support in the form of unemployment insurance and stimulus measures targeted at households. These payments were largest in the spring and summer of last year, but even in the fourth quarter aggregate real disposable personal income (DPI) was 3.7 percent above the level prevailing in late 2019, despite the low level of employment.6 The still-elevated level of DPI, combined with the low level of consumption, resulted in an aggregate saving rate of more than 13 percent in the fourth quarter, nearly double its level from a year earlier. That said, these aggregate figures mask important variation across households, and many low-income households, especially those whose earnings declined as a result of the pandemic and recession, have seen their finances stretched. . . . but spending fell back late in the year As COVID cases began rising again in November, some states retightened restrictions, and many households likely cut back voluntarily on their activities, leading to a retrenchment in spending on services such as restaurants and travel. Spending on durable goods also stepped down late in the fourth quarter, possibly in part because many households had already purchased durable items such as furniture and electronics earlier in the year. Further, while higherincome households accrued substantial savings over the course of 2020, some lowerincome consumers likely began to reduce their spending toward the end of the year, as support provided by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) waned. More recently, however, retail sales data and high-frequency indicators suggest that consumer spending rose appreciably in January, likely in part because of additional fiscal support from the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, which was enacted in late December. Soaring equity and house prices have pushed aggregate household wealth to record highs Stock markets rallied after plunging in the spring and, more recently, have reached record highs, largely reflecting the arrival of effective vaccines, optimism about further fiscal stimulus, and notable improvement in the outlook for corporate earnings. House prices—which are of particular importance for the value of assets held by many households— have also soared, boosted by strong demand from record-low mortgage rates, a shift in demand from multifamily to single-family homes during the pandemic, and a shortage of inventory. As a result, aggregate household wealth is elevated relative to income, which is supporting consumption, particularly of relatively well-off households. Lending standards for households are less accommodative than before the pandemic, but credit is still available to households with good credit profiles Consumer lending standards remain less accommodative than before the pandemic, on balance, and are particularly tight for individuals with low credit ratings. Banks tightened lending standards substantially in the first half of 2020, but the tightening moderated in the second half and credit remains available to higher-score borrowers. Banks also reported considerably weaker demand for consumer credit on balance. Credit card lending volumes have been weak, consistent with the incomplete recovery in overall consumer spending, but auto lending has been stronger amid the rapid recovery in motor vehicle sales to consumers. Mortgage lending has also been robust, boosted both by record-low mortgage interest rates and by mortgage credit that is generally available to those with good credit scores who are seeking traditional mortgage products. Overall, loan defaults have remained low despite the weak labor market, supported by various forbearance programs. The housing sector made a remarkable recovery in the second half of 2020 . . . Residential investment grew at a robust pace of 14 percent over the four quarters of 2020, as booming home sales and housing construction in the second half more than offset the outsized declines in the second quarter that resulted from the COVID-19 outbreak and mitigation efforts. Historically low mortgage rates and the swift adaptation of the real estate sector to the pandemic boosted housing activity later in the year, with both single-family housing starts and existing home sales rising to their highest levels since the mid-2000s. The burst of housing demand has left inventories of both new and existing homes at all-time lows, putting upward pressure on home prices and supporting new construction. Some of these patterns in the data likely reflect changes in preferences during the pandemic, with households opting for larger homes and housing in less dense areas, but the degree to which these changes will persist remains unclear. . . . and business fixed investment also rebounded rapidly . . . Business fixed investment—that is, private expenditures for equipment, structures, research and development, and other intellectual property—contracted sharply in the first half of 2020 but largely retraced its decline in the second half. The recovery in business investment has been centered in equipment and intellectual property, which rose 2.4 percent over the four quarters of 2020, supported by stronger business sentiment, improved financing conditions, and the unwinding of direct disruptions from social distancing. In addition, the health crisis and the shift to widespread teleworking have led to a surge in investment in both medical equipment and computers. In contrast, investment in nonresidential structures continued to decline sharply in the second half. Drilling investment was particularly hard hit and fell 30 percent in 2020 as a result of declines in energy demand and oil prices. Investment in nondrilling structures also fell, although more moderately. Long build times imply that the decline in new construction projects started in the first half of 2020 led to less ongoing spending in the second half; moreover, firms likely remain uncertain about future demand for many types of structures in the wake of the pandemic. . . . amid notable improvements in corporate financing conditions Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms through capital markets have improved notably since June. In particular, interest rates have remained very low and corporate bond spreads have narrowed. Gross issuance of nonfinancial corporate bonds was solid in the second half of the year, although it slowed from the exceptional pace in the second quarter. In contrast, aggregate bank lending to businesses contracted in the second half, reflecting lower demand for new loans, the repayment of outsized draws on credit lines earlier this year, the forgiveness of some loans under the Paycheck Protection Program, and tighter bank credit standards. In part because of policy actions to foster smooth market functioning, corporations have been able to take advantage of favorable funding conditions in capital markets to refinance debt and bolster their balance sheets; as a result, corporate cash holdings are at record levels. In the small business sector, privately financed lending also picked up over the summer, and loan performance improved, supported by the Paycheck Protection Program. Nevertheless, credit availability for small businesses remains fairly tight, demand for such credit is weak, and default risk is still elevated. Exports remain lower, but imports have recovered U.S. exports remain well below pre-pandemic levels. With many foreign economies still weak, U.S. exports of goods have not quite fully recovered from their earlier sharp declines, while exports of services remain depressed because of the continued suspension of most international travel. In contrast, imports have regained most of their lost ground. Reduced imports of services have been offset by a full rebound of goods imports, which reflects strong U.S. demand for household goods. Both the nominal trade deficit and current account deficit, relative to GDP, widened since 2019. Federal fiscal stimulus provided substantial support to economic activity while also significantly boosting the budget deficit and debt Federal fiscal policy measures enacted in response to the pandemic continue to provide crucial income support to households and businesses, as well as grants-in-aid to state and local governments. These measures have also facilitated loans to businesses, households, states, and localities. In total, the Congressional Budget Office projects that in fiscal years 2020 and 2021, the additional federal government expenditures and foregone revenues from these policies will total roughly $3 trillion—around 15 percent of nominal GDP. In addition, the decline in economic activity has pushed down tax receipts while pushing up outlays for certain transfer programs—most notably for unemployment insurance and Medicaid. These tax decreases and transfer increases (referred to as automatic stabilizers) worked in tandem with the discretionary stimulus to support aggregate demand and blunt the extent of the economic downturn. The combination of the discretionary stimulus measures and the automatic stabilizers caused the budget deficit in fiscal 2020 to rise to 15 percent of nominal GDP—the largest deficit as a share of GDP in the post–World War II era—up from its already elevated level of 4½ percent in fiscal 2019. Consequently, the ratio of federal debt held by the public to nominal GDP rose from 79 percent in fiscal 2019 to 100 percent by the end of fiscal 2020, the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1947. Even so, the cost of servicing the federal debt is not particularly elevated by historical standards, because Treasury rates are extremely low. State and local governments are facing challenging fiscal conditions State and local governments are confronting challenging budget conditions because of weak tax collections and extraordinary expenses related to the pandemic. Nominal state government tax collections in 2020 were about 1 percent below their 2019 level and well below levels generally expected before the pandemic. The magnitude of these revenue shortfalls varied considerably across states, with the largest shortfalls in states that rely heavily on sales taxes, tourism, and energy production. In contrast, property taxes—the principal local government tax—have continued to rise apace, and state and local governments have received federal aid that has assisted with COVIDrelated expenses and helped ease budget strains. Meanwhile, bond market conditions for state and local governments have been generally accommodative in the second half of the year, as robust municipal bond issuance has been supported by historically low yields and tax-exempt municipal bond funds have seen solid inflows. Even so, in response to social-distancing restrictions (including virtual learning), current budget pressures, and concerns over future budgetary challenges, state and local governments have cut payrolls—particularly in the education sector—an unprecedented 6½ percent over the past year. Notably, public-sector employment is down significantly in nearly all states, including those that have experienced relatively smaller revenue shocks. Vaccines offer hope of an end to the pandemic, but risks to the outlook are still substantial The economic outlook presented in Part 3 depends crucially on the course of the COVID-19 pandemic. The vaccination campaign now under way offers the prospect of a return to more normal conditions by the end of this year. But the pace of vaccinations, the rate of decline in the spread of the virus, and the speed with which people return to normal activities all remain highly uncertain, particularly given the emergence of new, apparently more contagious strains. The longer-run economic effects of the pandemic are also difficult to predict. Many small businesses have shut down and may not reopen. Some pandemic-driven shifts in economic activity, such as from in-person to online shopping and from office-based to remote work, may prove to be permanent. These shifts could increase productivity by substituting remote interactions for costly travel and commuting, but they could also put persistent upward pressure on unemployment, as affected workers may need to seek new jobs and perhaps new occupations. The pandemic has also disrupted schooling at all levels, which could have persistent negative effects on educational attainment and economic outcomes for affected students. Financial Developments The expected level of the federal funds rate over the next few years has remained near zero Economic forecasters and financial market participants expect the federal funds rate over the next several years to remain at the effective lower bound. Market-based measures of federal funds rate expectations over the next few years have increased moderately since June and remain below 0.25 percent until the second quarter of 2023. According to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in January, the median respondent views the most likely path of the federal funds rate as remaining in its current range of 0 to ¼ percent until the first half of 2024.Yields on longer-term U.S. nominal Treasury securities increased markedly. . . Yields on nominal Treasury securities at longer maturities increased markedly since mid-2020 after falling sharply in late February and early March as investors’ concerns regarding the implications of the COVID-19 outbreak for the economic outlook led to both falling policy rate expectations and flight-to-safety flows (figure 30). The increase in yields on longerterm Treasury securities followed news of the imminent arrival of multiple highly effective COVID-19 vaccines in the fall of 2020 and expectations of further fiscal support, as well as an increase in the issuance of longer-term Treasury securities. Near-term uncertainty about longer-dated nominal Treasury yields—as measured by volatility of nearterm swaptions of 10-year interest rates—has remained low. . . . while spreads of other long-term debt to Treasury securities narrowed . . . Despite the rise in Treasury yields, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important determinant of mortgage interest rates—decreased somewhat, on balance, amid the Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases of MBS and have remained near their historical lows. Thus, the spread between yields on 30-year agency MBS and comparable-maturity Treasury yields has narrowed. Approval of the effective vaccines late last year, optimism about further fiscal support, and notable improvement in the outlook for corporate earnings boosted investors’ optimism, and improvement in the credit quality of firms drove declines in yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds. As with mortgage securities, spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity nominal Treasury yields have narrowed considerably since the end of June—as corporate bond yields declined and yields on nominal Treasury securities increased—and have returned to levels observed before the pandemic. Yields on municipal debt continued to decline in the second half of 2020, and spreads on municipal bonds over comparable-maturity nominal Treasury yields have narrowed substantially since the end of June, as nominal Treasury yields increased and investors grew more optimistic about further fiscal stimulus and aid to state and local governments. The yearend expiration of lending facilities that were authorized under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and that use CARES Act funding did not lead to upward pressure on corporate or municipal bond spreads. . . . and market functioning for Treasury securities, corporate bonds, mortgagebacked securities, and municipal bonds continued to improve . . . After having improved substantially in the spring of last year, measures of market liquidity for Treasury securities—such as measures of market depth and trade sizes— continued to improve somewhat in the second half of 2020 and moved closer to prepandemic levels, especially for shorter-dated Treasury securities. However, measures of liquidity for longer-dated Treasury securities and in some portions of the MBS market— notably for those securities excluded from Federal Reserve open market purchases— remained somewhat below pre-pandemic levels. Measures of market functioning of the corporate bond market continued to improve as bid-ask spreads narrowed considerably and returned to their pre-pandemic levels and issuance of corporate bonds in primary markets was robust. Measures of market functioning of the municipal bond market— such as robust issuance of municipal bonds in primary markets and round-trip transaction costs—indicate that market conditions remained stable in the second half of 2020.. . . while conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable The effective federal funds rate and other secured and unsecured short-term rates continued to trade within the target range of the federal funds rate, as ample liquidity, primarily due to substantial increases in reserves, has kept markets functioning smoothly. Since June, measures of stress in short-term funding markets—including trading volumes, issuance, and spreads to overnight index swaps—have remained stable at or near pre-pandemic levels, and year-end funding pressures were minimal. Broad stock prices have risen notably After starting to rebound last spring from their COVID-related declines, broad stock prices have risen notably further since mid-2020, as the arrival of effective vaccines, optimism about further fiscal support, and notable improvement in the outlook for corporate earnings outweighed investor concerns regarding the rise in COVID-19 cases. The prospect of an economic recovery aided by effective vaccines and fiscal support led to outsized price gains in some cyclical sectors, such as the consumer discretionary, materials, and information technology sectors. Similarly, stock prices of smaller corporations considerably outperformed large-cap stock price indexes. After experiencing depressed levels through early fall, bank stock price indexes increased considerably in late 2020, boosted by positive vaccine news, a generally improved investor outlook for loan losses and bank profitability, and the release of favorable stress-test results in late 2020. Measures of realized and implied stock price volatility for the S&P 500 index—the 20-day realized volatility and the VIX—decreased sharply from their very high levels at the end of the second quarter but remained moderately above their historical medians, respectively.Bank credit contracted, while bank profitability improved In contrast with strong debt issuance through securities markets, outstanding bank loan balances across most major loan categories have contracted since mid-June amid generally weak borrower demand and tight lending standards. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans at banks declined sharply in the second half of 2020, reflecting the repayment of large credit-line draws made earlier in the year and the forgiveness of some loans under the Paycheck Protection Program, as well as generally weak borrower demand for such loans and tighter bank lending standards. However, overall C&I loan balances at banks remained higher compared with a year earlier. Measures of bank profitability, such as return on assets and return on equity, rebounded in the second half of 2020 following very low readings in the second quarter, when banks significantly increased their loan loss provisions, but have remained below pre-pandemic levels. Delinquency rates on bank loans remained low, as banks’ loss-mitigation and forbearance programs allowed many borrowers to stay current on their loans. Large banks posted higher-than-expected earnings in the fourth quarter, bolstered by capital market activity and loan loss reserve releases, while low rates continued to weigh on profit margins. International Developments Economic activity abroad snapped back in the third quarter . . . As in the United States, foreign GDP partially rebounded in the third quarter of 2020. Nonetheless, foreign economic activity remains well below its pre-pandemic level, as a resurgence of infections in many economies has recently led to renewed socialdistancing restrictions. The accompanying slowdown in economic activity appears to have been less dramatic than that in the spring, as economies have adjusted to function better under social-distancing restrictions. In addition, many current containment measures have been less stringent relative to those in the spring, and fiscal and monetary policies continue to support the path to recovery. Since last spring, manufacturing has generally recovered more than services, which remain depressed because consumers have avoided socially intensive activities, especially in the hospitality and leisure sectors. Some higher-income Asian economies, where infections are more under control, experienced relatively better GDP growth than many advanced economies and benefited from increased export demand in the second half of 2020. Most notably, China’s GDP was 6.5 percent higher in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared with a year ago. In many Latin American countries and advanced foreign economies (AFEs), fourth-quarter GDP contracted relative to a year earlier. Although the ongoing spread of the virus— including new variants—is concerning, many AFEs have already started immunizing their populations and have commitments to purchase substantial stocks of vaccines. Controlling the virus globally, however, will be challenging, in part because many emerging market economies (EMEs) have more limited access to vaccines and face greater distribution challenges.. . . with considerable policy support and subdued inflation Efforts to contain the virus’s resurgence in the fourth quarter prompted some foreign central banks and fiscal authorities to provide additional support to households and businesses, particularly in the AFEs. High debt levels limited the fiscal space in some EMEs, and emergency aid to sustain employment and household spending expired in some EMEs with elevated fiscal concerns. Monetary policy across foreign economies was highly accommodative, and financing conditions remained supportive of growth, with a few major AFE central banks introducing new stimulus measures late last year. Indeed, market-implied policy paths for the Japanese, U.K., and European central banks signal a prolonged period of monetary accommodation. Even with substantial policy support, AFE unemployment rates at the end of 2020 are higher than they were before the pandemic. Unemployment rates in Europe and Japan rose moderately during the spring and have remained relatively unchanged. Canada, however, endured a large and rapid increase in unemployment during the spring and a commensurate decline by year-end, similar to the U.S. experience. The countryspecific dynamics of unemployment partly reflect differences in labor market structures, employment protection regulations, and the expansion of wage subsidy programs. In general, unemployment rates in the EMEs increased since the start of the pandemic, and some Asian economies adopted direct wage subsidies to avert large dislocations in their labor markets.Despite the recovery in activity and employment in some sectors of the economy, lower overall demand and continued uncertainty about the path of the virus helped keep inflation subdued abroad. In many foreign economies, inflation remains below central banks’ targets. In the euro area and Japan, the consumer price index fell in 2020, reflecting subdued inflation expectations and persistent economic slack. Longer-term sovereign yields remained low, while risk sentiment improved . . . Longer-term sovereign yields in major AFEs have moved up, on net, but remained near historically low levels amid continued monetary policy accommodation. Foreign equity markets rebounded in the second half of 2020, reflecting not only supportive monetary and fiscal policies, but also the development of effective vaccines. Although AFE stock markets largely recovered, they still underperformed U.S. equities, with greater restrictions on activity abroad and a lower share of companies that benefited from the digital economy.EME equity markets have recovered since the spring, with recent strong capital inflows. Asian equity indexes rose well above pre-pandemic levels, while those in Latin America posted modest gains relative to a year ago, largely reflecting Asian economies’ lower infection rates, better fundamentals, and larger fiscal space to provide additional stimulus. Along with the improvement in equity markets, sovereign borrowing spreads generally narrowed, although they are still above pre-pandemic levels. . . . and the broad dollar depreciated The broad dollar index—a measure of the trade-weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—fell in the second half of last year. Both the continued improvement in market conditions following the stresses of last March and highly accommodative U.S. monetary policy contributed to dollar depreciation. On balance, the dollar has depreciated about 3.5 percent relative to a year ago. The dollar broadly weakened against AFE currencies, notably the euro. The dollar also fell against some Asian emerging market currencies, particularly the Chinese renminbi and Korean won. Part 2 Monetary PolicyThe Federal Open Market Committee maintained the federal funds rate near zero as it seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run . . . In light of the effects of the continuing public health crisis on the economy and the associated risks to the outlook, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent since March 2020, when the global pandemic led the Committee to quickly lower the target range to the effective lower bound. In its revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, issued in August, the Committee reaffirmed its commitment to achieving maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and noted that “following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time” so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. (See the box “The FOMC’s Revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.”) The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved and has indicated that it expects it will be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. . . . and the Committee increased the holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account In addition, the Federal Reserve has continued to expand its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion per month. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Committee’s current guidance regarding asset purchases indicates that increases in the holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS in the System Open Market Account will continue at least at this pace until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In addition, the minutes of the January 2021 FOMC meeting noted the importance attached to clear communications about the Committee’s assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when progress could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of purchases. The FOMC is committed to using its full range of tools to promote maximum employment and price stability The ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation, and it poses considerable risks to the economic outlook. The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximumemployment and price-stability goals. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and is prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. In addition to evaluating a wide range of economic and financial data and informationgathered from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, policymakers routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate provided by various monetary policy rules. Such prescriptions can provide useful benchmarks for the FOMC. Although simple rules cannot capture the complexities of monetary policy and many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to adhere strictly to the prescriptions of any specific rule, some principles of good monetary policy can be illustrated by these policy rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules and Shortfalls from Maximum Employment”). The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has grown since the end of June, reflecting continued asset purchases of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has grown to $7.4 trillion from $7 trillion at the end of June, reflecting continued asset purchases to help foster accommodative financial conditions and smooth market functioning, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Federal Reserve has continued rolling over at auction all principal payments from its holdings of Treasury securities. Principal payments received from agency MBS and agency debt continue to be reinvested into agency MBS. Agency commercial mortgage-backed securities purchases have also continued, but in very small amounts. The increase in asset holdings on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet due to Treasury securities and agency MBS purchases has been partially offset by declines in several other asset categories. Outstanding balances at many of the Federal Reserve’s emergency liquidity and credit facilities have declined since June.In particular, outstanding balances for the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility have all fallen to near zero. Draws on central bank liquidity swap lines have decreased substantially, and, despite continued large-scale offerings, usage of repurchase operations has been essentially zero since their minimum bid rate was increased in mid-June. The expansion in the balance sheet was accompanied by a substantial increase in Federal Reserve liabilities, including reserve balances held by depository institutions as well as nonreserve liabilities such as currency and other deposits. The Federal Reserve concluded the review of its strategic framework for monetary policy in the second half of 2020 Over 2019 and 2020, the Federal Reserve conducted a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its statutory dualmandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In addition to the release ofthe revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy in August (see the box “The FOMC’s Revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy”), analytical work that was prepared by Federal Reserve System staff and that served as background to the review was released to the public. In December, two changes were made to the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) to enhance the information provided to the public. First, the release of the full set of SEP exhibits was accelerated by three weeks: Starting with the December 2020 meeting, the FOMC began releasing all SEP exhibits on the day of the policy decision (following the conclusion of an FOMC meeting) rather than with the release of the FOMC meeting minutes. As such, the written summary of the projections that had been included as an addendum to the minutes of the corresponding FOMC meeting was discontinued. Second, two new exhibits were added that display a time series of diffusion indexes for participants’ judgments of uncertainty and risks. These diffusion indexes illustrate how FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainties and risks have evolved over time.Part 3 Summary of Economic ProjectionsIn conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 15–16, 2020, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 to 2023 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longerrun projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Beginning with the December 2020 FOMC meeting, all Summary of Economic Projections charts and tables previously released with the minutes of a meeting will be released following the conclusion of an FOMC meeting. That is, the release of the distribution of participants’ projections, participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks associated with the projections, and Table 2 and associated box, which describe projection error ranges, have been accelerated by three weeks. Two new exhibits, Figures 4.D. and 4.E., have been added to further enhance the information provided on uncertainty and risks by showing how FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainties and risks have evolved over time.Monitoring Economic Activity with Nontraditional High-Frequency IndicatorsThe unprecedented magnitude, speed, and nature of the COvID-19 shock to the economy rendered traditional statistics insufficient for monitoring economic activity in a timely manner. As a result, policymakers around the world turned to nontraditional indicators of activity, both those based on privatesector “big data” and those newly developed by official statistical agencies. Because some of the most salient characteristics of these indicators are their timeliness and the time span they cover (such as daily or weekly), they are often called “high-frequency indicators.” An important example of the usefulness of highfrequency indicators is the case of payroll employment. The Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) monthly measure of payroll employment is one of the most reliable, timely, and closely watched business cycle indicators. However, during the onset of the pandemic in the United States, even the BLS Current Employment Statistics (CES) data were published with too long of a lag to track the dramatic dislocations in the labor market in a timely manner. Specifically, from the second half of March through early April, the economy was shedding jobs at an unprecedented rate, but those employment losses were captured only in the employment situation release issued on May 8, 2020. Because of this lag, economists looked to various private data sources to gain insights about the currentstate of the labor market. An important example is data from the payroll processor ADP that cover roughly 20 percent of private U.S. employment, a sample size similar to the one used by the BLS to construct the CES. Estimates of changes in employment constructed from ADP data have tracked the official CES data remarkably well since the start of the pandemic recession, and the ADP data possess the important benefits of being available earlier and at a weekly frequency.Weekly employment estimates based on ADP data were particularly valuable not only last spring when employment plummeted and then quickly rebounded, but also during the renewed COvID-19 wave that started this past fall. In particular, high-frequency ADP employment data indicate that the fall and winter virus wave had a smaller effect on the labor market than was seen last spring, likely because there were fewer mandated shutdowns of businesses than in the spring, because many businesses implemented adaptations that made it easier for them to continue to operate (for example, curbside pickup), and because many individuals changed their behavior (for example, by wearing masks such that more economic activities are deemed safer now than in the spring). Most recently, the BLS data show that private payroll employment remained little changed through its survey week in mid-January, and the ADP data indicate that employment improved modestly through early February. Additionally, the latest ADP data indicate that the leisure and hospitality sector—which includes hotels, restaurants, and entertainment venues and is particularly affected by government-mandated restrictions and social distancing—started adding jobs again in recent weeks after experiencing a temporary downturn at the end of last year. Outside of the labor market, several new highfrequency indicators have been useful in monitoring the massive effects of the COvID-19 pandemic on consumer spending. Weekly data from NPD (a market analytics fi rm) on nonfood retail sales captured in real time the dramatic and sudden drop in consumption in mid-March; the monthly Census Bureau data recorded that decline only with a lag. The NPD data also reflected how the income support payments to families, provided by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, rapidly affected consumer spending in mid-April. More recently, the NPD data showed some decline in consumption late last year, followed by a pickup in January after the passage of the most recent fiscal stimulus package. Several nontraditional data sources illustrate that services spending remains depressed as social distancing continues to restrain in-person activity. With rapid changes in the economic environment, many statistical agencies also developed high-frequency indicators. For example, the Census Bureau released data on weekly new business applications. During the initial stage of the pandemic recession, new business applications fell compared with previous years, a typical pattern during economic downturns. However, new business applications started to rebound notably during the summer, and for the year as a whole, they were higher than the average over the previous three years, a pattern that differs dramatically from previous business cycles. The increase in applications appears to be concentrated in industries that rapidly adapted to the landscape of the pandemic, such as online retail, personal services, information technology, and delivery. It remains unclear, however, whether these business applications will lead to actual job creation at the same rate as in the past. As another example, the Census Bureau developed high-frequency survey statistics that contain information about thefinancial struggles of household. These data indicate that the financial stress of households increased late last year as households were becoming less confident about being able to make their next mortgage or rent payment as well as more likely to expect income loss over the next four weeks, but households’ financial expectations improved somewhat in January. Overall, nontraditional high-frequency indicators have served several purposes over the past year. First, they provide timely alternative estimates that complement official statistics and can also be used to verify movements in official statistics. Second, they are often helpful for assessing economic developments more quickly and with greater granularity than what can be found in official statistics. Third, high-frequency indicators without a direct counterpart in official statistics give a different perspective and help enhance our understanding of economic developments. These nontraditional indicators are also subject to several potential limitations, such as systematic biases due to nonrepresentativeness of data or small (and possibly nonrandom) samples. Importantly, only time will tell if such indicators will continue to provide a signal above and beyond traditional indicators as the high-frequency shocks associated with the pandemic dissipate. Overall, however, the use of nontraditional high-frequency indicators over the past year has amply shown that they can yield large benefits, especially when economic conditions are changing rapidly. in the employment-to-population ratio were particularly evident among those groups.  Aggregate wage growth appears to be little changed despite the weakness in the labor market Although weakness in the labor market generally puts downward pressure on overall wages, the best available measures suggest that wage growth in 2020 was little changed from 2019. Total hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index, which includes both wages and benefits, rose 2.6 percent during the 12 months ending in December, only slightly below pre-pandemic rates. Wage growth as computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tracks the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey, was about 3½ percent during 2020, similar to the growth rate in 2019.3 The continued gains in aggregate wages mask important heterogeneity, however; according to the Atlanta Fed data, workers with lower earnings and nonwhites experienced larger decelerations in wages than other groups last year. Price inflation remains low despite rebounding since last spring As measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), inflation fell from 1.6 percent in December 2019 to a low of 0.5 percent in April, as economic activity dropped sharply. Since then, inflation has partially recovered along with the pickup in demand, but it was only 1.3 percent in December—still well below the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objective of 2 percent. After excluding consumer food and energy prices, which are often quite volatile, the 12-month measure of core PCE inflation was 1.5 percent in December. An alternative way to abstract from transitory influences on measured inflation is provided by the trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The 12-month change in this measure declined to 1.7 percent in December Disparities in Job Loss during the PandemicAlthough employment has improved substantially since its trough in April 2020, the labor market recovery remains far from complete: As of January 2021, the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio, a broad measure that encompasses both increased unemployment and decreased labor force participation, was still 3.6 percentage points below its February 2020 level. All industries, occupations, and demographic groups experienced significant employment declines at the start of the pandemic, and, over the ensuing months, all groups have experienced at least some partial recovery. That said, employment declines last spring were steeper for workers with lower earnings and for Hispanics, African Americans, and other minority groups, and the hardest-hit groups still have the most ground left to regain. Although disparities in labor market outcomes generally widen during recessions, certain factors unique to this episode—in particular, the social-distancing measures taken by households, businesses, and governments to limit in-person interactions—have profoundly shaped the incidence of recent job losses in different segments of the labor market. Because jobs differ in the degree to which they involve personal contact and physical proximity, in whether they can be performed remotely, and in whether they are deemed to serve “essential” functions, social-distancing measures have had disparate effects across industries and occupations. To illustrate this point, figure A reports net changes in employment in 11 broad industry categories, both during the period of acute job losses last spring and over the longer interval since the start of the pandemic (column 2). Net job losses through January have been especially severe in the leisure and hospitality industry—in which employment is still 22.9 percent below pre-pandemic levels—and in other services, a category that includes barber shops and beauty salons.1 By contrast, employment in most other broad industries is now 5 percent or less below pre-pandemic levels. Job losses have thus been disproportionately concentrated in lower-wage consumer service industries, in which business operations are strongly affected by socialdistancing measures and relatively few workers are able to work from home. In keeping with the sectoral composition of recent job losses, workers in lower-wage jobs have been hit especially hard. Figure B uses data from the payroll processor ADP to plot employment indexes for four job tiers defined by hourly wages. Between February and April of last year, employment fell most sharply for jobs in the bottom quartile of the pre-pandemic wage distribution. Between April and June, employment rose most quickly for these lowest-paying jobs. In subsequent months, job gains moderated substantially for all groups, and as of mid-January, employment in the lowest-paying jobs was about 20 percent below its pre-pandemic level. In comparison, employment in the higher-paying job tiers is now about 10 percent or less below pre-pandemic levels. Similar disparities are apparent across demographic groups. Figure C shows the change in each group’s EPOP ratio. Between February 2020 and January 2021, the EPOP ratio fell by a similar amount for both men and women; in contrast, during many previous recessions the EPOP ratio declined substantially more for men. (In fact, given that men’s employment rate was substantially higher than women’s before the pandemic, the decline in employment for women as a percentage of pre-recession employment has been larger, which contrasts even more starkly with previous recessions.) Since February 2020, the EPOP ratio has fallen more for people without a bachelor’s degree than for those with at least a bachelor’s degree, more for prime-age individuals than for those under age 25 or over age 55, and more for Hispanics, African Americans, and Asians than for whites. In general, the groups experiencing the largest declines in employment since last February are more commonly employed in the industries that have experienced the greatest net employment declines to date, such as leisure and hospitality; these demographic groups are also less likely to report being able to work from home.Since the start of the pandemic, another important impediment to individuals’ ability to work or look for work has been the absence of in-person education for many K–12 students. Because many working parents are unable to work from home while monitoring their children’s virtual education (depending on the nature of their jobs and the availability of other caregivers), the widespread lack of K–12 in-person education may also explain some of the differences across groups. For example, among mothers aged 25 to 54 with children aged 6 to 17, the fraction who said they are not working or looking for work for caregiving reasons was 2½ percentage points higher in the three months ending January 2021 than over the year-earlier period, compared with a ½ percentage point increase for fathers. Relative to white mothers, the increase was about twice as large for Hispanic mothers and more than twice as large for African American mothers, and it was also more than twice as large for mothers without any college education as for mothers with more education. As the spread of COvID-19 is contained and a growing share of the population is immunized, some of the unique factors that have exacerbated disparities since the start of the pandemic will likely ease. For example, as COVID becomes less prevalent, businesses offering in-person services (for example, in the leisure and hospitality industry) will move closer to pre-pandemic levels of employment. In addition, as more schools return to offering in-person education, childcare constraints will become less acute. Even as labor market impediments specific to the pandemic subside, however, the speed at which the labor market moves toward full employment will be important for narrowing the disparities that have widened since the start of the pandemic, as research has consistently shown that strong labor markets especially benefit lower-wage and disadvantaged workers. The pace of labor market gains will also depend on how many unemployed workers have the opportunity to return to their original jobs. In January 2021, 2.2 percent of labor force participants (representing 34.6 percent of unemployed workers) reported being unemployed because of a permanent job loss, up from 1.3 percent of the labor force (8.8 percent of unemployed workers) in April 2020.8 Research has shown that workers who return to their previous employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages similar to what they were making previously, whereas laid-off workers who do not return to their previous employer experience a longer-lasting decline in earnings.Developments Related to Financial StabilityThis discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system since the COvID-19 outbreak and summarizes recent actions and developments at facilities established by the Federal Reserve to support the flow of credit throughout the economy.1 The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the financial sector, and funding risks. Overall, asset valuation pressures, which were elevated before the COvID-19 outbreak in the United States, briefly subsided at the onset of the outbreak as asset prices plummeted but have since retraced in most markets. In particular, prices in equity, corporate bond, and residential real estate (RRE) markets have returned to or exceeded pre-pandemic levels, buoyed in part by recent developments related to vaccines. Equity prices have more than recovered from the steep declines at the onset of the pandemic, with investor appetite broadly rebounding across most sectors. Equity market volatility remains high, indicating persistent uncertainty regarding the pandemic and the related course of economic activity. yields on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities have narrowed considerably. Treasury yields across the maturity spectrum declined at the onset of the pandemic and remain near historical lows. The credit quality of outstanding leveraged loans deteriorated early this year, but investor appetite remains strong and new issuance has increased in the second half of 2020. RRE prices also rose rapidly in the second half of 2020, outpacing rent increases. Commercial real estate prices remain at historically high levels despite high vacancy rates and appear susceptible to sharp declines, particularly if the pace of distressed transactions picks up or, in the longer term, the pandemic leads to permanent changes in demand. vulnerabilities associated with business and household debt increased over the course of 2020. Business debt has risen from levels that were already elevated before the outbreak of the pandemic. Business leverage now stands near historical highs. While nearterm risks associated with debt service may be limited by large cash balances at large fi rms, low interest rates, and recently improved earnings prospects, insolvency risks at small and medium-sized fi rms, as well as at some large fi rms, remain considerable. The household sector entered the downturn with relatively low debt but experienced significant financial strains because of the unprecedented spike in unemployment and business closures. Government programs—including expanded unemployment insurance and direct stimulus payments in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act—and a rebound in economic activity in the second half of 2020 reduced economic hardship for households and mitigated the deterioration in household credit quality. In the financial sector, bank profitability and capital positions, which were strained by the outbreak of the pandemic, improved in the second half of 2020 because of a combination of lower-than-expected losses, a better economic outlook, and restrictions imposed by the Federal Reserve on capital distributions by the largest banks. In particular, the capitalization of U.S. global systemically important banks, or G-SIBs, exceeds pre-pandemic levels. In addition, the results of stress tests released in June and December 2020 indicated that banks would generally remain well capitalized under extremely severe recession scenarios. Leverage at broker-dealers changed little over 2020 and remains at historically low levels. While the liquidity deterioration across dealer-intermediated markets in March 2020 demonstrated potential fragility despite dealers’ low leverage, this fragility has been likely mitigated by emergency lending facilities and the supervisory action of the Federal Reserve. By contrast, leverage at life insurance companies has risen to post- 2008 highs. vulnerabilities from leverage at hedge funds remain elevated. Finally, securitization volumes increased after coming to a halt in March 2020 but remain significantly below pre-pandemic levels. Over the course of 2020, banks relied only modestly on short-term wholesale funding and maintained significant levels of high-quality liquid assets. By contrast, developments at the onset of the pandemic demonstrated significant structural vulnerabilities at money market mutual funds and open-end investment funds, particularly those that invest substantially in corporate and municipal debt. These funds experienced large, sudden redemptions in March 2020, which contributed to strains in broader short-term funding markets and fixed-income debt markets. Federal Reserve actions, including emergency lending facilities, have mitigated these vulnerabilities for now, but without structural reforms, the vulnerabilities demonstrated in March 2020 will persist and could significantly amplify future shocks. The outlook for the pandemic and economic activity remains uncertain globally. In response to the economic disruptions caused by the pandemic, many foreign governments have ramped up spending to support households and businesses. Nevertheless, financial systems in some foreign economies are more vulnerable than before the pandemic, and these vulnerabilities may grow in the near term. Risks from widespread and persistent stresses in emerging markets and dollar funding markets could interact with risks associated with the course of COvID-19 for the U.S. financial system. In turn, these risks could be amplified by the vulnerabilities identified in this discussion and produce additional strains for the U.S. financial system and economic activity. Developments Associated with Facilities to Support the Economy during the COVID-19 Crisis In the immediate wake of the pandemic, the Federal Reserve took forceful actions and established emergency lending facilities, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury as needed. These actions and facilities have supported the fl ow of credit to households and businesses and have served as backstop measures that have given investors confidence that support will be available should conditions deteriorate substantially. Some of the facilities established at the onset of the pandemic are still operational. The Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) stabilized short-term funding markets and improved the fl ow of credit to households and businesses. Although balances in the PDCF, CPFF, and MMLF have fallen from their initial highs to low levels, the facilities will continue to serve as important backstops against further market stress until their scheduled expiration at the end of March 2021. The Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) was established to extend credit to lenders that participate in the Paycheck Protection Program of the Small Business Administration (SBA), which has provided payroll support for small businesses. Through mid-January 2021, the Federal Reserve has made nearly 15,000 PPPLF advances to more than 850 banking institutions, totaling more than $110 billion in liquidity. The Federal Reserve has taken actions that reduce spillovers to the U.S. economy from foreign financial stresses. Temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines were established in March 2020, in addition to the preexisting standing lines, and have improved liquidity conditions in dollar funding markets in the United States and abroad by providing foreign central banks with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market stress. The FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility has helped support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars to a broad range of countries, many of which do not have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve. The temporary swap lines and the FIMA Repo Facility will continue to serve as liquidity backstops until their scheduled expiration at the end of September 2021. Other facilities established at the onset of the pandemic expired either at the end of December 2020 or at the beginning of January 2021. The Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility were established to improve the flow of credit through bond markets, where large fi rms and municipalities obtain most of their long-term funding. The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility was also set up to support the issuance of securities backed by student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, loans backed by the SBA, and certain other assets. Altogether, before expiring at the end of 2020, these facilities brought rapid improvements to credit markets, with only modest direct interventions. The Main Street Lending Program (Main Street) expired at the beginning of January 2021. In its period of operation, Main Street purchased about 1,800 loan participations, totaling more than $16 billion, which helped small and medium-sized businesses from some of the hardesthit areas of the country and covered a wide range of industries.The FOMC’s Revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy StrategyOn August 27, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) issued a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.  This document, first released in January 2012, lays out the Committee’s goals, articulates its framework for monetary policy, and serves as the foundation for its policy actions. The revised statement encapsulates the key conclusions from the Federal Reserve’s review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. The review, which commenced in early 2019, was undertaken because the U.S. economy has changed in ways that matter for monetary policy. In particular, the neutral level of the policy interest rate—the policy rate consistent with the economy operating at full strength and with stable inflation—has fallen over recent decades in the United States and abroad. This decline in the neutral policy rate increases the risk that the effective lower bound (ELB) on interest rates will constrain central banks from reducing their policy interest rates enough to effectively support economic activity during downturns. In addition, during the economic expansion that followed the Global Financial Crisis—the longest U.S. expansion on record—the unemployment rate hovered near 50-year lows for roughly 2 years, resulting in new jobs and opportunities for many who have typically been left behind. At the same time, with brief exceptions, inflation ran below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. The revised statement begins by reaffirming the Committee’s commitment to its statutory mandate from the Congress to promote maximum employment, price stability, and moderate long-term interest rates. It also describes the benefits of explaining policy actions to the public as clearly as possible. The statement then outlines important changes to the characterization of the Committee’s policy framework for achieving its dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. After stating that economic variables fluctuate in response to disturbances and that monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy, the statement notes that the Committee’s primary means of adjusting policy is through changes in the policy interest rate (the target range for the federal funds rate). Furthermore, because the neutral level of the policy rate is now lower than its historical average, “the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past.” Therefore, “the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased.” The statement then notes that the “Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals,” indicating that it could deploy other policy tools, such as forward guidance and asset purchases, when the policy rate is at its ELB. In its revised statement, the Committee characterizes maximum employment as a “broad-based and inclusive goal” in addition to saying—as it did in the 2012 statement—that maximum employment is not directly measurable and that it changes over time and depends largely on nonmonetary factors. During the Fed Listens events that were a pillar of the review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, policymakers heard from a broad range of stakeholders in the U.S. economy about how monetary policy affects peoples’ daily lives and livelihoods. A key takeaway from these events was that a strong labor market during the late stages of an economic expansion—conditions that were in effect in 2019 and early 2020—offers significant benefits to residents of low- and moderate-income communities, primarily by providing employment opportunities for people who have had difficulty finding jobs in the past. The revised statement says that “the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls [emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level” rather than by “deviations”— the word used in the earlier statement. In previous decades, inflation tended to rise noticeably in response to a strengthening labor market. It was sometimes appropriate for the Fed to tighten monetary policy as employment rose toward its estimated maximum level in order to stave off an unwelcome rise in inflation. The change to “shortfalls” clarifies that, in the future, the Committee will not have concerns when employment runs at or above real-time estimates of its maximum level unless accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of the dual-mandate goals. The Committee’s longer-run goal for inflation remains 2 percent, unchanged from the 2012 statement.4 The revised statement emphasizes that the FOMC’s policy actions to achieve maximum employment and price stability will be most effective if longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. However, if inflation runs below 2 percent following economic downturns but never moves above 2 percent even when the economy is strong, then, over time, inflation will average less than 2 percent. Households and businesses will come to expect this result, meaning that inflation expectations would tend to move below the 2 percent inflation goal and pull down realized inflation. Lower inflation expectations also pull down the level of nominal interest rates, further diminishing the scope for monetary policy to reduce the policy rate during a downturn and further worsening economic outcomes. To prevent inflation expectations from falling below 2 percent and the adverse cycle that could ensue, the statement indicates that “the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time.” The revised statement acknowledges that “sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system.” Therefore, as with the 2012 statement, the Committee’s policy decisions will take into account “its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment” of the statutory goals. The Committee concludes its revised statement by indicating its intention to undertake a review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices roughly every five years. Conducting a review at regular intervals is a good institutional practice, provides valuable feedback, and enhances transparency and accountability.Monetary Policy Rules and Shortfalls from Maximum EmploymentSimple interest rate rules relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the deviation of inflation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. Policymakers consult policy rate prescriptions derived from a variety of policy rules as part of their monetary policy deliberations without mechanically following the prescriptions of any particular rule. Most rules analyzed in the research literature respond to deviations—both positive and negative—of resource utilization from its longer-run level because their design was informed by historical periods and economic models in which high resource utilization and a strong labor market are accompanied by inflation pressure and in which policy rates remain well above the effective lower bound (ELB). Economic performance in recent decades, including during the previous economic expansion, has demonstrated that a strong labor market can be sustained without inducing an unwanted increase in inflation. During that expansion, the unemployment rate fell to low levels—it remained at or below 4 percent from early 2018 until the start of the pandemic—bringing many benefits to families and communities that, all too often, had been left behind, with no sign of excessive pressures on prices. The lack of undue inflation pressures during this period illustrates that a strong labor market, by itself, need not cause concern unless accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. In addition, the expansion reinforced the view that assessments of the maximum level of employment are imprecise and may change over time.1 Tightening monetary policy in the absence of evidence of excessive inflation pressures may result in an unwarranted loss of opportunity for many Americans, whereas if an undue increase in infl ation were to arise, policymakers would have the tools to address such an increase. Reflecting these considerations, the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy refers to “shortfalls of employment” from the Committee’s assessment of its maximum level rather than the “deviations of employment” used in the previous statement.2 This change has important implications for the design of simple interest rate rules. This discussion examines the prescriptions from a number of commonly studied monetary policy rules, along with the prescriptions from a modified simple rule that, all else being equal, would not call for increasing the policy rate as employment moves higher and unemployment drops below its estimated longer-run level. This modified rule aims to illustrate, in a simple way, the Committee’s focus on shortfalls of employment from assessments of its maximum level. Other key changes to the Committee’s monetary policy strategy, including the aim of having inflation average 2 percent over time to ensure that longerterm inflation expectations remain well anchored, are not incorporated in the simple rules analyzed in this discussion. Policy Rules: Some Key Design Principles and Limitations In many stylized models of the economy, desirable economic outcomes can be achieved by following a monetary policy rule that incorporates key principles of good monetary policy. One such principle is that monetary policy should respond in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions, thus fostering public understanding of policymakers’ goals and strategy.3 A second principle is that, to stabilize inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted over time in response to persistent increases or decreases in inflation to an extent sufficient to ensure a return of inflation to the longer-run objective.Simple monetary policy rules also have important limitations. A first limitation is that many formulations of simple rules do not recognize that the ELB limits the extent that the policy rate can be lowered to support the economy, which may impart a downward bias to both inflation and inflation expectations. As part of the FOMC’s revised strategy to mitigate the challenges posed by the ELB and anchor longer-term inflation expectations at 2 percent, the Committee states that it “seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time.” None of the simple rules analyzed in this discussion take into account average inflation performance or developments in measures of inflation expectations. As such, they do not reflect this important aspect of the FOMC’s monetary policy strategy. A second limitation is that simple rules respond to only a small set of economic variables and thus necessarily abstract from many of the considerations taken into account by the FOMC. For example, a simple rule might respond to movements in a specific labor market indicator, such as the overall unemployment rate. However, no single labor market indicator can precisely capture the size of the shortfall from maximum employment or identify when a strong labor market can be sustained without putting undue upward pressure on inflation. A third limitation of simple rules for the policy rate is that they generally do not recognize the fact that the monetary policy toolkit includes other tools—notably, large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance, which are especially relevant when the policy rate is near or at the ELB.Economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, and the “first difference” rule.6 In addition to these rules, figure A shows a “balanced approach (shortfalls)” rule, which represents one simple way to illustrate the Committee’s focus on shortfalls from maximum employment. All of the policy rules analyzed in this discussion embody the key principles of good monetary policy previously noted. They are also subject to the associated limitations. Thus, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule, as is the case with all simple rules, does not fully capture the monetary policy strategy that the FOMC announced in August 2020. All five rules feature the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an estimate of the rate of unemployment in the longer run (ut LR) and the current unemployment rate; the first-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment rate gap rather than its level.7 All of the rules abstract from the uncertainty affecting estimates of the unemployment rate gap. In addition, all of the rules include the difference between inflation and the FOMC’s longerrun objective of 2 percent. All but the first-difference rule include an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt LR). By construction, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule prescribes identical policy rates to those prescribed by the balanced-approach rule at times when the unemployment rate is above its estimated longer-run level. However, when the unemployment rate is below that level, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule is more accommodative than the balanced-approach rule because it does not call for the policy rate to rise as the unemployment rate drops further.Contrary to the other simple rules featured here, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below the ELB. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in accommodation following a recession during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its ELB, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes only a gradual return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule after the economy begins to recover. Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate from the five rules. For each period, the figure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules, taking as given the prevailing economic conditions and estimates of ut LR and rt LR at the time. The four rules whose formulas do not impose the ELB imply prescriptions of strongly negative policy rates in response to the pandemic-driven recession, well below their respective troughs in the 2008–09 recession. These deeply negative prescribed policy rates show the extent to which policymakers’ ability to support the economy through cuts in the policy rate was constrained by the ELB during the pandemic-driven recession—a constraint that helped motivate the FOMC’s other policy actions at the time, including forward guidance and asset purchases. Regarding the recovery from the 2008–09 recession, all of the simple rules shown here prescribe departure from the ELB well before the FOMC determined that it was appropriate to do so. The FOMC’s judgment that it was appropriate to maintain a more accommodative path of the federal funds rate than prescribed by these rules was informed by a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule calls for lower policy rates than the balanced-approach rule at times when unemployment is below its estimated longer-run level, thus providing somewhat more policy accommodation during the 2006–07 period and from late 2016 until the start of the pandemic. The fact that the policy rate prescriptions for the balanced-approach and balanced-approach (shortfalls) rules coincide from the 2008–09 recession up to the end of 2016 reflects the slow recovery in this period, during which unemployment remained above real-time estimates of its longer-run level.Although these two rules prescribe identical policy rates over most of the period shown, including departure from the ELB about two years before the actual departure in December 2015, one should not conclude that they generally offer a similar degree of policy accommodation. Had the previous economic expansion not been cut short by the pandemic, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule would likely have continued to prescribe a lower policy rate than the balanced-approach rule. In addition, knowledge on the part of households and businesses that policymakers will respond to shortfalls rather than deviations from maximum employment can, in practice, help foster more accommodative financial conditions even when employment is below its maximum level because financial conditions are affected by the expected path of the policy rate. Expectations of lower policy rates in the future—once employment has recovered— can reduce longer-term interest rates, support accommodative financial conditions, and encourage aggregate spending in the present. These observations underline the importance of communication about future policy actions and demonstrate how a shift in focus to employment shortfalls, in the context of a simple rule, can provide more policy accommodation—even during times like today when employment remains depressed. Forecast UncertaintyThe economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the second year, 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the fourth year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the third year, and 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infl ation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those figures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The fi nal line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of shortterm interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years.
Summary Over the first half of 2021, progress on vaccinations has led to a reopening of the economy and strong economic growth, supported by accommodative monetary and fiscal policy. However, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have continued to weigh on the U.S. economy, and employment has remained well below pre-pandemic levels. Furthermore, shortages of material inputs and difficulties in hiring have held down activity in a number of industries. In part because of these bottlenecks and other largely transitory factors, PCE (personal consumption expenditures) prices rose 3.9 percent over the 12 months ending in May. Over the first half of the year, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) held its policy rate near zero and continued to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to support the economic recovery. These measures, along with the Committee’s guidance on interest rates and the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, will help ensure that monetary policy continues to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Recent Economic and Financial Developments The labor market. The labor market continued to recover over the first six months of 2021. Job gains averaged 540,000 per month, and the unemployment rate moved down from 6.7 percent in December to 5.9 percent in June. Although labor market improvement has been rapid, the unemployment rate remained elevated in June, and labor force participation has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for much of the past year. A surge in labor demand that has outpaced the recovery in labor supply has resulted in a jump in job vacancies and a step-up in wage gains in recent months. Inflation. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the PCE price index, moved up from 1.2 percent at the end of last year to 3.9 percent in May. The 12-month measure of inflation that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation) was 3.4 percent in May, up from 1.4 percent at the end of last year. Some of the strength in recent 12-month inflation readings reflects the comparison of current prices with prices that sank at the onset of the pandemic as households curtailed spending—a transitory result of “base effects.” More lasting but likely still temporary upward pressure on inflation has come from prices for goods experiencing supply chain bottlenecks, such as motor vehicles and appliances. In addition, prices for some services, such as airfares and lodging, have moved up sharply in recent months toward more normal levels as demand has recovered. Both survey-based and market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have risen since the end of last year, largely reversing the downward drift in those measures in recent years, and are in a range that is broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run inflation objective. Economic activity. In the first quarter, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased 6.4 percent, propelled by a surge in household consumption and a solid increase in business investment but restrained by a substantial drawdown in inventories as firms contended with production bottlenecks. Data for the second quarter suggest a further robust increase in demand. Against a backdrop of elevated household savings, accommodative financial conditions, ongoing fiscal support, and the reopening of the economy, the strength in household spending has persisted, reflecting continued strong spending on durable goods and solid progress toward more normal levels of spending on services.Financial conditions. Since mid-February, equity prices and yields on nominal Treasury securities at longer maturities increased, as the rapid deployment of highly effective COVID-19 vaccines in the United States and the support provided by fiscal policy boosted optimism regarding the economic outlook. Despite having increased since February, mortgage rates for households remain near historical lows. Overall financing conditions for businesses and households eased further since February, as market-based lending conditions remained accommodative and bank-lending conditions eased markedly. Large firms, as well as those households that have solid credit ratings, continued to experience ample access to financing. However, financing conditions remained tight for small businesses and households with low credit scores. Financial stability. While some financial vulnerabilities have increased since the previous Monetary Policy Report, the institutions at the core of the financial system remain resilient. Asset valuations have generally risen across risky asset classes with improving fundamentals as well as increased investor risk appetite, including in equity and corporate bond markets. Vulnerabilities from both business and household debt have continued to decline in the first quarter of 2021, reflecting a slower pace of business borrowing, an improvement in business earnings, and government programs that have supported business and household incomes. Even so, business-sector debt outstanding remains high relative to income, and some businesses and households are still under considerable strain. In the financial sector, leverage at banks and broker-dealers remains low, while available measures of leverage at hedge funds increased into early 2021 and are high. Issuance volumes of collateralized loan obligations and asset-backed securities recovered strongly through the first quarter of 2021, while issuance of non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities was weak in that quarter. Funding risks at domestic banks continued to be low in the first quarter, but structural vulnerabilities persist at some types of money market funds and bankloan and bond mutual funds. International developments. Foreign GDP growth moderated at the start of the year, as some countries tightened public health restrictions to contain renewed COVID-19 outbreaks. Compared with last spring, many foreign economies exhibited greater resilience to public-health-related restrictions, and their governments have continued to provide fiscal support. Recent indicators suggest a pickup in activity in advanced foreign economies this spring following an increase in vaccination rates and an easing of restrictions. However, conditions in emerging market economies are more mixed, in part dependent on their success in containing outbreaks and the availability of vaccines. Inflation has been rising in many economies, as the price declines seen last spring reversed and commodity prices ramped up. Monetary and fiscal policies continue to be supportive, but some foreign central banks are adopting or signaling less-accommodative policy stances. Foreign financial conditions generally improved or held steady. Equity prices and longer-term sovereign yields increased across advanced foreign economies, boosted by their ongoing reopening. Equity markets in emerging market economies were mixed, and flows into dedicated emerging market funds slowed. After trending lower since the spring of 2020, the foreign exchange value of the dollar has changed little on net since the start of the year. Monetary Policy Interest rate policy. To continue to support the economic recovery, the FOMC has kept the target range for the federal funds rate near zero and has maintained the monthly pace of its asset purchases. The Committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with its assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed that rate for some time. Balance sheet policy. With the federal funds rate near zero, the Federal Reserve has also continued to undertake asset purchases, increasing its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by $40 billion per month. These purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Committee expects these purchases to continue at least at this pace until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In coming meetings, the Committee will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward these goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee is prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Special Topics The uneven recovery in labor force participation. The labor force participation rate (LFPR) has improved very little since early in the recovery and remains well below pre-pandemic levels. Relative to its February 2020 level, the LFPR remains especially low for individuals without a college education, for individuals aged 55 and older, and for Hispanics and Latinos. Factors likely contributing both to the incomplete recovery of the LFPR and to differences across groups include a surge in retirements, increased caregiving responsibilities, and individuals’ fear of contracting COVID-19; expansions to the availability, duration, and level of unemployment insurance benefits may also have supported individuals who withdrew from the labor force. Many of these factors should have a diminishing effect on participation in the coming months as public health conditions continue to improve and as expanded unemployment insurance expires. Recent inflation developments. Consumer price inflation has increased notably this spring as a surge in demand has run up against production bottlenecks and hiring difficulties. As these extraordinary circumstances pass, supply and demand should move closer to balance, and inflation is widely expected to move down. Supply chain bottlenecks in U.S. manufacturing and trade. Supply chain bottlenecks have hampered U.S. manufacturers’ ability to procure the inputs needed to meet the surge in demand that followed widespread factory shutdowns during the first half of last year. Additionally, a massive influx of goods has exceeded the capacity of U.S. ports, extending manufacturers’ wait times for imported parts. The stress on supply chains is reflected in historically high order backlogs and historically low customer inventories; these stresses, together with strong demand, have led to increased price pressures. When these bottlenecks will resolve is uncertain, as they reflect the global supply chain as well as industry-specific factors, but for some goods, such as lumber, the previous sharp increases in prices have begun to reverse. Inflation expectations. To avoid sustained periods of unusually low or high inflation, a fundamental aspect of the FOMC’s monetary policy framework is for longer-term inflation expectations to be well anchored at the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective. Even though the pace of price increases has jumped in the first half of this year, recent readings on various measures of inflation expectations indicate that inflation is expected to return to levels broadly consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective after a period of temporarily higher inflation. That said, upside risks to the inflation outlook in the near term have increased. Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which relate a policy interest rate to a small number of other economic variables, can provide useful guidance to policymakers. Many of the rules have prescribed strongly negative values of the federal funds rate since the start of the pandemic-driven recession. Because of the effective lower bound for the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve’s other monetary policy tools—namely, forward guidance and asset purchases—have been critical for providing the necessary support to the economy through this challenging period. The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Since January, the growth in reserves, the drawdown of the Treasury General Account, and the surge in usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility have significantly affected the composition of the Federal Reserve’s liabilities. Against a backdrop of low short-term market interest rates and ample liquidity, the use of the ON RRP facility has increased substantially since April and has reached a recent high of nearly $1 trillion, compared with usage near zero in February. Factors contributing to this increase included the decline in Treasury bill supply, downward pressure on money market rates, and the recent technical adjustment to the Federal Reserve’s administered rates. Part 1 Recent Economic and Financial DevelopmentsDomestic Developments The labor market improved substantially in the first half of the year as the economy reopened and activity rebounded Payroll employment increased by 3.2 million jobs in the first half of 2021, driven by a 1.6 million job gain in the leisure and hospitality sector, where the largest employment losses occurred last year. Despite the substantial improvement in the labor market, employment remained well below its pre-pandemic level. In addition, although the unemployment rate declined 0.8 percentage point in the first half of the year, to 5.9 percent in June, it remained well above its pre-pandemic level. This figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as factors related to the pandemic appear to be weighing on participation in the labor market. A brisk increase in labor demand outpaced the return of labor supply . . . With economic activity rebounding, labor demand rose briskly in the spring, while the supply of labor struggled to keep up. Employers reported widespread hiring difficulties, job openings jumped to about 30 percent above the average level for 2019, and the ratio of job openings to job seekers surged. With a dwindling pool of temporarily laid-off workers to recall, hiring increasingly involved reallocation of workers across firms and industries, a more timeconsuming process. In addition, enhanced unemployment benefits have allowed potential workers to be more selective and reduce the intensity of their job search. Faced with a challenging environment for hiring, many employers raised wages to attract new workers and lengthened the workweeks of existing employees.. . . which was restrained by ongoing effects of the pandemic . . . Several pandemic-related factors continued to weigh on labor supply in the spring. The share of working-age adults either employed or actively seeking work—the labor force participation rate—has remained low after falling dramatically with the onset of the pandemic and stood at 61.6 percent in June. With less than half of the population fully vaccinated for COVID-19 and inoculation rates far lower in some places, safety in the workplace remained a salient issue for many potential workers, and caregiving demands were still elevated for many households. Furthermore, a surge in retirements both last year and this year, possibly in response to health-related concerns or job loss induced by the pandemic, reduced the pool of potential hires for employers. . . . and much slack remains in the labor market . . . Although the unemployment rate has moved down sharply from its pandemic high, broad measures of labor conditions continue to point to substantial slack in the labor market. The employment-to-population ratio, which encompasses both unemployment and labor force participation, remains well below the trend observed in recent years, at 58.0 percent in June. Adjusted to include workers who have exited the labor force since the start of the pandemic and workers on temporary layoff misclassified as nonparticipants, the unemployment rate was about 8.7 percent in June.. . . especially for some groups that have been particularly hard hit by the crisis Further progress has been made since the turn of the year in reversing the pandemic-induced spike in unemployment for all racial and ethnic groups. That said, improvement in the labor market has been uneven. The effect of the pandemic on employment was largest for workers with lower wages, for workers with lower educational attainment, and for African Americans and Hispanics, and these hardhit groups still have the most ground left to regain. And the pandemic seems to have taken a particularly large toll on the labor force participation of mothers, especially Hispanic mothers. Wages have risen sharply as the economy has reopened . . . Amid the transition to a more normal pace of economic activity, labor market pressures have led to a step-up in wage gains so far this year. Total hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index rose at an annual rate of 4.0 percent over the first three months of the year, lifting the 12-month change up to 2.8 percent. More timely indicators show continuing large wage gains, though swings in the composition of the workforce make these difficult to interpret.2 In particular, average hourly earnings exhibited very large monthly increases in April, May, and June despite being held down in those months by large job gains in industries with belowaverage wages. Compensation per hour in the business sector, a broad-based but volatile measure of wages, salaries, and benefits, rose 8 percent through the first quarter, bolstered significantly by changes in the composition of the workforce.. . . and price inflation has stepped up, boosted by returning demand and by supply bottlenecks . . . As measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), inflation jumped from 1.2 percent in December 2020 to 3.9 percent in May, well above the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. The closely watched core PCE price index, which excludes more volatile components, rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in May. The price acceleration appears to have arisen largely from a small number of categories, as suggested by muted movements in the Dallas trimmed mean index, which removes the largest price changes. For example, sharp priceincreases for goods have been concentrated among a subset of products experiencing strong demand coupled with supply chain bottlenecks. In addition, as demand for services has returned to normal, some prices have bounced back from levels depressed following the onset of the pandemic. (See the box “Recent Inflation Developments.”) . . . with further upward pressure on inflation from rising import prices Increased import prices also contributed to the step-up in consumer price inflation in the first half of 2021, boosted by commodity prices, which rose in response to strong demand for goods. The effects of higher import prices have been exacerbated by bottlenecks abroad that have raised transport costs. After a sharp recovery in late 2020 and early 2021, oil prices have risen over $10 per barrel in the past few months, a substantial increase but less dramatic than some of the increases for nonfuel commodity prices. Even though oil consumption is still well below prepandemic levels, oil production is also down, and oil prices are now above pre-pandemic levels. Oil demand continues to be held back by the slow recovery in travel and commuting. Meanwhile, OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and its partners, notably Russia, have only slowly increased their production toward pre-pandemic levels, offsetting the effect of weak demand. Survey-reported inflation expectations and market-based inflation compensation measures have moved up in recent months Survey-based measures of inflation expectations at medium- and longer-term horizons have moved up over the first half of the year. These measures, which exhibited a downward drift in recent years, have returned to levels last observed 5 to 10 years ago. Similarly, market measures of longer-term inflation compensation—including inflation swaps and the yield gap between nominal Treasury securities and Treasury InflationProtected Securities—continued to climb in 2021, returning to the range observed in the 2010–14 period. (See the box “Assessing the Recent Rise in Inflation Expectations.”) Gross domestic product surged in the first half of the year . . . Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a brisk annual rate of 6½ percent in the first quarter and, with indicators suggesting another strong increase in the second quarter, appears to have now recovered to its prepandemic level. Even so, supply chain bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints have damped the economic rebound to some degree this year, causing order backlogs and longer delivery times and leading producers to meet demand in part by drawing down inventories rather than from new production. . . . driven by a sharp increase in household spending . . . The rebound in GDP primarily reflects a resurgence of household spending, driven by the reopening of the economy and additional fiscal support. In particular, the easing of voluntary and mandatory social distancing has spurred an increase in services spending, such as more prevalent dining out, hotel stays, and air travel. Still, concerns about COVID-19 continue to limit in-person interactions, and services spending has yet to reach its pre-pandemic level. Spending on goods, which quickly recovered in the second half of 2020, soared from January through May. Spending on durable goods has been especially strong, including on motor vehicles, where sales reached levels among the highest on record in March and April before being held back in May by extremely low dealer inventories. . . . supported by rising personal income, consumer sentiment, and wealth . . . The marked increase in personal consumption has been supported by increasing income, accumulated savings, rising housing and stock market wealth, low interest rates, and improving consumer sentiment. Disposable personal income—that is, household income net of taxes—surged in the first quarter of this year, boosted by further fiscal support, including stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment insurance benefits, along with solid gains in wages and compensation. Meanwhile, the continuing brisk rise in house prices and stock prices has boosted the wealth of homeowners and equity investors. The tremendous gains in income have led to a very elevated saving rate. That said, these aggregate figures mask important variation across households, and many low-income households, especially those whose earnings declined as a result of the pandemic and recession, have seen their finances stretched. . . . and ready access to credit for households with good credit profiles Household borrowing has expanded moderately. Consumer loans have grown at a modest pace so far this year, driven by the continued expansion of auto loans. Banks reported significant easing of lending standards on consumer loans in the first quarter of 2021 after a moderate easing in the last quarter of the previous year, though standards remain tight relative to the period just before the pandemic. Delinquency rates for nonprime auto and credit card borrowers remained well below pre-pandemic levels, likely stemming from forbearance programs and fiscal support. Mortgage credit is broadly available to high-credit-score borrowers who meet standard conforming loan criteria but continues to be tight for borrowers with lower credit scores. Historically low mortgage rates have led to elevated refinance and purchase activity, supported by accommodative credit standards for high-credit-score borrowers The housing sector remains remarkably strong Residential investment surged following the shutdown last spring and has remained at a high level since then. Low mortgage rates have boosted demand, as have adaptations to the pandemic, including working from and spending more time at home. New construction, home sales, and residential improvements have all been well above prepandemic levels, and demand has outpaced supply, as construction has been limited by material shortages and sales have been constrained by low inventories. This tension has fueled a sizable rise in home prices and driven down the inventory of homes for sale to extraordinarily low levels. Business investment has recovered from its plunge last year and continues to rise at a solid pace . . . Solid business investment in the first half of the year has been supported by the unwinding of pandemic disruptions, accommodative monetary policy and fiscal support, and the strong business outlook. Investment in equipment and intangibles has led the rise in investment, especially investment in hightechnology equipment and software driven by the shift to remote work and other changes to business practices. Investment in structures in the oil and gas sector also has risen in recent quarters, spurred by a turnaround in oil prices. In contrast, investment in structures outside of the drilling and mining sector has been subdued after falling sharply last year. . . . amid financing conditions that remain accommodative for nonfinancial corporations Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms through capital markets have remained broadly accommodative since the start of the year and continued to be supported by historically low interest rates. The gross issuance of nonfinancial corporate bonds continued to be solid during the first part of year and was particularly strong in March for investmentgrade firms. Corporate bond yields have remained at historically low levels, and corporate bond spreads have narrowed to very low levels, supported in part by signs of improvement in the credit quality of nonfinancial firms. In contrast, net bank lending to businesses has been subdued so far this year. For commercial and industrial loans, increasing new loan originations have been obscured to some degree by balance reductions due to forgiveness of loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Commercial real estate loans have remained little changed, held down in part by weak growth in construction and land development loans amid tighter credit standards earlier in the year. For small businesses, privately financed lending has climbed smartly since the turn of the year, as the PPP has increased access to credit. Outside of the PPP, credit availability for small businesses remains fairly tight, demand for such credit is weak, and default risk is still elevated. Small business loan performance has improved, and the share of small businesses expecting to require additional financial assistance has moved down, though hotels and restaurants report ongoing stress. Exports have partly recovered as imports have continued to increase U.S. exports have moved higher in recent months but still remain below pre-pandemic levels. Despite the robust recovery for goods exports, the overall contribution to GDP from exports has been held down by the continuing depressed level of service exports given ongoing restraint in international travel. In contrast to the relatively modest recovery of exports, imports have soared since last summer, boosted by strong demand for both immediate consumption and rebuilding inventories. High levels of imports have strained the ability of the international logistics channel to deliver goods to U.S. customers in a timely fashion. Given the recent strength of imports relative to the milder recovery in exports, both the nominal trade deficit and current account deficit, relative to GDP, widened since 2019. Federal fiscal actions provided substantial support to economic activity while also significantly raising the budget deficit Federal fiscal policies enacted in response to the pandemic, most recently the American Rescue Plan, continue to fuel the economic recovery now under way. Stimulus checks have boosted most household incomes, and supplemental unemployment insurance has supported households affected by job loss. Increased grants-in-aid to state and local governments and business programs have supported aggregate demand as well. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that pandemic-related fiscal policies enacted to date will increase federal expenditures or reduce federal revenues by over $5 trillion over 10 years, with much of the effect on the deficit occurring in fiscal years 2020 and 2021.5 These discretionary fiscal measures, combined with the automatic stabilizers—the reduction in tax receipts and increase in transfers that occur as a consequence of depressed economic activity—caused the federal deficit to surge to 15 percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2020 Federal debt held by the public jumped to around 100 percent of nominal GDP—the highest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1947—and is expected to rise further this fiscal yearChallenges to state and local government financing have been mitigated by federal aid The pandemic pushed down state and local government tax collections and induced additional COVID-related expenses. In response, federal policymakers provided a historic level of fiscal support to state and local governments, covering budget shortfalls in aggregate, although some governments continue to confront pandemic-related fiscal stress. Moreover, the drag on state tax receipts from the pandemic is abating, as revenues have moved up smartly so far this year. Property tax receipts—the primary tax source for local governments—have increased steadily during the pandemic. State and local government payrolls, though, have only edged up from their lows at the onset of the pandemic, and they remain 5 percent below pre-pandemic levels, including notably lower education employment. Finally, municipal bond market conditions continued to be generally accommodative this year. Issuance has been robust, as yields remained historically low and bond spreads relative to Treasury securities have declined moderately so far this year. Financial Developments The path of the federal funds rate expected to prevail over the next year remains near zero Market-based measures of the path that the federal funds rate is expected to take over thenext few years remain below 0.25 percent until the fourth quarter of 2022, about two quarters earlier than in February.rapid deployment in the United States of highly effective COVID-19 vaccines, the reopening of contact-intensive sectors of the economy, and expectations that further support for aggregate demand would be coming from fiscal policy. Survey-based measures of the expected path of the policy rate shifted up somewhat since the start of the year. According to the results of two surveys that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York conducted in June—the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants—the median respondent of each survey views the most likely path of the federal funds rate as remaining in its current range of 0 to ¼ percent until the third quarter of 2023, a quarter earlier than in March.Longer-term nominal Treasury yields were little changed . . . Yields on nominal Treasury securities at longer maturities were little changed, on net, since mid-February. Concurrently, nearterm uncertainty about longer-term interest rates—as measured by volatility of near-term swap options (swaptions) on 10-year swap interest rates—remained roughly unchanged, on net, since February. . . . while spreads of other long-term debt to Treasury securities narrowed modestly on net Across different categories of corporate credit, bond yields are little changed since midFebruary and have remained near the lowest levels of their historical distributions. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparablematurity Treasury securities have narrowed modestly and stand somewhat below the levels prevailing at the onset of the pandemic, supported in part by signs of improvement in the credit quality of nonfinancial firms. Since mid-February, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities—an important factor entering into the pricing of home mortgages—were little changed, on net, while those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities increased a bit, leaving their spread modestly lower on net. Municipal bond spreads over rates on longer-term Treasury securities have declined moderately across credit categories since mid-February and stand at the lower end of the historical distribution, while municipal bond yields across credit categories are at about their alltime lowest historical levels. Broad equity price indexes increased moderately Broad stock price indexes have continued to rise since mid-February, as strong corporate earnings, optimism about the pace of vaccinations, additional fiscal stimulus, and signs of a faster pace of economic recovery outweighed concerns about high valuations, higher inflation, and prospects for the control of the virus abroad. Prices of cyclical stocks, including those associated with companies in the basic materials, energy, and industrial sectors, outperformed broad equity price indexes. Banks’ stock prices have also risen notably, on net, as the improved economic outlook and banks’ reports of strong first-quarter earnings provided a further boost to investor optimism regarding the banking sector. Measures of realized and option-implied stock price volatility for the S&P 500 index—the 20-day realized volatility and the VIX, respectively—have declined somewhat and are near their historical medians.Markets for Treasury securities, mortgagebacked securities, and corporate and municipal bonds have functioned well . . . Measures of market liquidity for Treasury securities—such as measures of market depth and bid-ask spreads—remained close to pre-pandemic levels overall, particularly for shorter-dated securities. However, longer-dated Treasury securities and some portions of the mortgage-backed securities market—notably those classes of securities excluded from Federal Reserve open market purchases—remain somewhat less liquid than before the onset of the pandemic. Measures of market functioning in the corporate and municipal bond markets remained stable since February, with these markets functioning roughly as they did in the months before the pandemic. Bid-ask spreads across corporate bond credit categories have been slightly below pre-pandemic levels, and issuance of corporate bonds in primary markets has been solid. Municipal bond market liquidity—as measured by round-trip transaction costs—has come back to near pre-pandemic levels. . . . while short-term funding market conditions remained stable The effective federal funds rate (EFFR) and other overnight unsecured rates have seen some slight downward pressure relative to the interest rate on excess reserves since mid-February. The EFFR has nevertheless been comparatively stable, while other shortterm interest rates registered more sizable declines. Secured overnight rates traded lower, with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate trading at or just above the offering rate on the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility since mid-March. Ample liquidity, arising from substantial increases in reserves, has, in conjunction with paydowns of Treasury bills, driven short-term interest rates lower. Notwithstanding the very low level of rates—including small volumes of negative-rate trading in overnight repurchase agreements on most days between mid-March and mid-June—short-term funding markets have functioned smoothly since February. Money market funds increased significantly their holdings of overnight repurchase agreements Since February, assets under management of government money market funds (MMFs) have gradually increased to an all-time high of nearly $4 trillion amid the disbursement of fiscal relief payments to individuals, states, and municipalities, and as some banks have reportedly taken steps to discourage additional deposit inflows. Against the backdrop of a sizable decrease in outstanding Treasury bill supply, government MMFs reduced their holdings of Treasury and agency securities while increasing their holdings of overnight repurchase agreements, including with the Federal Reserve. This development led to record levels of usage of the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP facility in late May and June. Bank credit remained little changed, while lending standards eased Total loans and leases outstanding at commercial banks remained little changed in the first half of the year. The April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, conducted by the Federal Reserve, reported easier standards for most business and household loans over the first quarter of the year. Bank profitability increased over the first quarter of 2021. Delinquency rates on bank loans remain low but may increase later in the year, as foreclosure moratoriums and payment forbearance programs are set to expire.International Developments The recovery abroad slowed in the first half of the year . . . A resurgence of COVID-19 cases late last year led to substantial tightening in socialdistancing restrictions in many foreign economies. Consequently, foreign GDP growth slowed in the last quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, as several advanced foreign economies (AFEs) experienced contractions in activity. In most AFEs, the level of GDP in the first quarter remained below its pre-pandemic peak. However, compared with last spring, many foreign economies exhibited greater resilience to public health restrictions, and their governments have continued to provide fiscal support. Recent available indicators suggest a pickup for AFEs in GDP growth in the second quarter of this year as vaccination rates increased and restrictions were eased. Although the situation in the AFEs appears to be improving, conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs) are more mixed, partly reflecting differences in success in containing COVID-19 outbreaks. Also, the pace of vaccinations in many EMEs remains slow due to supply shortages and other logistical challenges. Some higher-income Asian economies, where infections have so far remained mostly under control, experienced surprisingly fast growth, boosted by increased export demand and a partial recovery in domestic consumption. Most notably, the levels of GDP in China and in other industrialized EMEs such as Taiwan—which had managed to remain fairly insulated from the virus but has seen outbreaks recently—are already roughly 8 percent above their prepandemic levels. Conversely, in many Latin American countries and some South and Southeast Asian economies, infection outbreaks led to continuing or increased public health restrictions and social distancing. Reflecting these headwinds, recent economic indicators suggest a decline ingrowth in the second quarter of 2021 in many of these EMEs following a sharp rebound in the first quarter, with economic activity still well below pre-pandemic levels. Unemployment rates in Europe are about 1 percentage point higher in early 2021 than before the pandemic. This relatively muted change is partly a result of wage subsidy programs that kept workers on payrolls and employment protection regulations that limited rapid job destruction. Hours worked, however, have fallen more substantially, suggesting that the extent of economic slack in Europe may be greater than indicated by the unemployment rate. The unemployment trajectory in Canada was more similar to that in the United States, with a rapid increase early last spring followed by a steep decline subsequently. . . . amid a pickup in inflation and continued policy support Inflation rates abroad have increased in recent months. In many AFEs, inflation readings moved up since the beginning of the year after substantial declines last year. The rise in inflation was largely driven by base effects due to low price levels in 2020 as well as run-ups in energy prices. In some EMEs, currency depreciation and higher food prices are also contributing to inflation pressures. Even so, core inflation readings in many AFEs still point to moderate underlying inflation pressure, suggesting that the observed rise in inflation so far this year largely reflects temporary factors. Monetary policy abroad remained accommodative, as central banks focused on supporting growth and viewed the recent rise in inflation as transitory. Market-implied policy paths in many AFEs continue to signal a period of monetary accommodation, although paths in Canada and the United Kingdom moved higher this year. The European Central Bank increased its pace of asset purchases in the spring, and the Bank of Japan’s yield curve control policy proved effective in containing a rise in bond yields. By contrast, while still maintaining an accommodative policy rate, the Bank of Canada announced plans to end liquidity support programs and started slowing its pace of asset purchases. The Bank of England also slowed its pace of asset purchases but indicated that its policy stance remains accommodative. Monetary policy in EMEs was generally accommodative as well, but some EME central banks—including in Brazil, Russia, and Turkey—increased policy rates, citing concerns about inflationary pressures. The Bank of Mexico, while leaving its policy rate unchanged, highlighted concerns about financial market volatility and past peso depreciation. Improved outlook led to increases in foreign yields and equity prices . . . Longer-term sovereign yields and marketbased inflation compensation measures increased in some major advanced economies, as the economic outlook brightened and commodity prices rose. Despite the increase, market-based inflation compensation in many AFEs remained below the inflation target of their respective central banks. Japanese yields were little changed due to the Bank of Japan’s yield curve control policy. Equity markets in AFEs generally rose despite the new wave of COVID-19 infections earlier this year, as many economies proved resilient to increased case numbers and lockdowns and the vaccine rollout allowed gradual reopening. Equities in emerging markets were mixed. Since the beginning of the year, equity prices in some EMEs, including South Korea, Taiwan, and Mexico, improved considerably, but equity prices in other countries, including China, underperformed. Inflows into dedicated EME investment funds slowed this year but remained positive, and EME bond spreads moved little so far this year. . . . and the dollar remained little changed After depreciating sharply in late 2020, the broad dollar index—a measure of the tradeweighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—has changed little, on net, since the beginning of the year. It has strengthened somewhat recently, amid increases in mediumterm U.S. yields. Among AFE currencies, the dollar appreciated most against the Japanese yen, as Japanese yields moved least. Since the beginning of the year, the U.S. dollar depreciated against the Canadian dollar, which was buoyed by higher commodity prices and signs of a stronger-than-expected recovery in Canada.Part 2 Monetary PolicyThe Federal Open Market Committee maintained the federal funds rate near zero as it seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run . . . As part of its actions to ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee has indicated that it expects it will be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. With inflation having run persistently below the Committee’s longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. . . . and the Committee increased the holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account In addition, the Federal Reserve has continued to expand its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion per month. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Committee’s current guidance regarding asset purchases indicates that increases in the holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS in the System Open Market Account will continue at least at this pace until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. In addition, the minutes of the June 2021 FOMC meeting noted the importance that policymakers attach to clear communications about the Committee’s assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals and to providing these communications well in advance of the time when progress can be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of asset purchases.In coming meetings, the FOMC will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward the Committee’s goals. The FOMC is committed to using its full range of tools to promote maximum employment and price stability Progress on vaccinations will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximumemployment and price-stability goals. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and is prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will continue to take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. In addition to considering a wide range of economic and financial data and information gathered from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, policymakers routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate provided by various monetary policy rules. These rule prescriptions can provide useful benchmarks for the FOMC. Simple rules cannot capture the complexities of monetary policy, and many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to adhere strictly to the prescriptions of any specific rule. However, some principles associated with good monetary policy can be illustrated by these policy rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules, the Effective Lower Bound, and the Economic Recovery”). The FOMC’s framework for conducting monetary policy involves a systematic approach in keeping with key principles of good monetary policy but allows for more flexibility than is implied by simple policy rules. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued to grow, reflecting purchases of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has grown to $8.1 trillion from $7.4 trillion at the end of January, reflecting continued asset purchases to help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The Federal Reserve has continued rolling over at auction all principal payments from its holdings of Treasury securities. Principal payments received from agency MBS and agency debt continue to be reinvested into agency MBS. After the March FOMC meeting, in light of the sustained smooth functioning of markets for agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), the Federal Reserve ended regular purchases of agency CMBS. The increase in aggregate asset holdings on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet arising from Treasury security and agency MBS purchases has been offset in part by declines in several other asset categories. Outstanding balances at many of the Federal Reserve’s emergency liquidity and credit facilities have declined since the end of January, and most facilities have now expired.In June, the Federal Reserve Board announced plans to begin winding down the portfolio of the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF). The SMCCF proved very important in restoring market functioning last year, supporting the availability of credit for large employers, and bolstering employment through the COVID-19 pandemic. The winding down of the SMCCF portfolio has been gradual and orderly and has not produced any adverse effect on market functioning. Draws on central bank liquidity swap lines have decreased further to near zero, and usage of repurchase operations has remained at zero since February. In contrast, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility has expanded to around $80 billion since the end of January. Reserves have increased significantly to around $4 trillion, mostly because of asset purchases and the large drawdown in the Treasury General Account from around $1.6 trillion in January to about $850 billion in June. However, reserves have been relatively stable more recently given a substantial increase in the use of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. Part 3 Summary of Economic ProjectionsIn conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 15– 16, 2021, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 to 2023 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longerrun value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability.The Uneven Recovery in Labor Force ParticipationBy many measures, the labor market has only partially recovered from the depths of the pandemicdriven recession. This discussion presents comparisons of recent readings on labor market conditions to those just before the pandemic. However, the reactions of businesses and workers to the pandemic may have long-lasting effects on the structure of the labor market. For example, the pandemic seems to have accelerated the adoption of new technologies by fi rms and the pace of retirements by workers. The post-pandemic labor market and the characteristics of maximum employment may well be different from those of early 2020. As shown in the top bar of figure A, in June the percentage of the population aged 16 and older that is employed—or the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio—was about 3 percentage points below its pre-pandemic (February 2020) level. This figure decomposes the decline in the EPOP ratio into the amount attributable to a decline in the percentage of the population working or actively looking for work, or the labor force participation rate (LFPR, light-blue bar), and an increase in unemployment (dark-blue bar). About one-half of the decline in the EPOP ratio since February 2020 reflects a decline in the LFPR, which in June was 1¾ percentage points below its pre-pandemic level, while the rest is due to elevated unemployment. Differences in these measures across various demographic groups existed even before the recession, and they widened after the start of the pandemic. While they have generally narrowed somewhat over the past year, the figure illustrates that differences across groups relative to pre-pandemic levels remain significant: EPOP ratios are more depressed for those without a college education relative to the college educated and for Hispanics relative to others, with much of these differences reflecting larger declines in the LFPRs of these groups. The EPOP ratio is depressed more for those aged 25 to 54 relative to other ages, while the LFPR has fallen by more for those aged 55 or older. While the unemployment rate has moved down gradually but steadily since peaking in April 2020, improvements in the LFPR have been less consistent, and since August 2020, the LFPR has fluctuated in a narrow, low range despite broader improvement in labormarket conditions. The LFPRs for most of the groups shown in figure A also remain well below pre-pandemic levels. The rest of this discussion covers three reasons why the recovery in the LFPR remains incomplete, and that also may help explain why the recovery has been weaker for some groups than others—namely, a surge in retirements, heightened caregiving responsibilities, and individuals’ fears of contracting COvID-19 . In addition, expansions to the availability, amount, and duration of unemployment insurance (UI) benefits have given many individuals the financial means to be more selective when finding a new job, especially if pandemic- or individual-specific factors have limited their ability to quickly reenter the labor force. Retirements: Even in the absence of the pandemic, the aging of the baby boomer cohort would likely have implied an increase in the share of the population that is retired relative to pre-pandemic levels of around 0.3 percentage point. However, the share of the population in the Current Population Survey (CPS) that indicates being out of the labor force and retired jumped at the start of the pandemic and, as shown in figure B, has increased by 1 percentage point since early 2020— accounting for more than one-half of the 1.7 percentage point decline in the aggregate LFPR over this period. Among individuals aged 55 and older, the increase has been larger for women than for men and larger for Hispanics and Asians than for whites and Blacks. Caregiving responsibilities: Figure C shows that nonparticipation in the labor force associated with caregiving has increased 0.7 percentage point. This increase likely reflects in part the difficulties imposed on parents and other caregivers from in-person education not being fully available to many K–12 students, and some of these parents may have decided to stop working or looking for work to help care for their children and facilitate their virtual education.Consistent with a considerable effect from students’ virtual education, estimates from the figure also show that the increase in nonparticipation for caregiving reasons has been larger for mothers aged 25 to 54 with children aged 6 to 17 (2.6 percentage points) than for women without their own children in the home (1.0 percentage point), women who only have children aged 5 and younger (1.4 percentage points), and fathers (0.6 percentage point) and accounts for all of the decline in the LFPR for mothers. The increase in nonparticipation for caregiving has been especially large for Black and Hispanic mothers, and it accounts for much of the larger decline in the LFPR for these groups.Fear of the COVID-19 virus: Individuals’ fears of contracting the COvID-19 virus are likely also still depressing labor force participation somewhat and may in part be reflected in the factors previously discussed; COvID-19 fears may be especially relevant for those who would otherwise be working on-site in high-contact industries and occupations—and even for some fully vaccinated individuals, such as older and immunocompromised workers who are at higher risk for severe illness or death from COvID-19. Consistent with the importance of this reason, data from the Census Bureau’s Household Pulse Survey show that between May 26 and June 7, 2021, about 1 percent of the population reported not working or having recently looked for work because of fears of COvID-19. This share was higher for Blacks and Hispanics, those aged 18 to 24, and individuals with no college education, which aligns with demographic differences in the share of individuals employed in high-contact industries before COvID-19 and with differences in individuals’ ability to work from home. Expanded unemployment insurance: The pandemic recession prompted an unprecedented expansion in the availability and level of support of UI. A suite of federal programs has extended benefits to groups normally ineligible for UI, increased the potential duration of benefits, and boosted the weekly benefit amounts received by UI claimants. Complementing the new programs, many states broadened UI eligibility at the start of the pandemic by temporarily suspending work search requirements and relaxing other eligibility criteria. While the income support from expanded UI and other fiscal stimulus likely led some jobseekers to search less intensively or to be more selective in accepting job offers, the effects of these programs on labor force participation are not clear The support from enhanced UI has been especially consequential for lower-wage workers, who have borne the brunt of recent job losses and who have benefited most from broader coverage and higher benefit levels. The path ahead: Many of the factors constraining labor force participation should gradually abate in the coming months, and, as they do, the overall participation rate should rise and the demographic disparities in labor force participation that widened during the pandemic will likely continue to narrow. Fears of getting or spreading COvID-19 are likely to recede if vaccination rates continue to climb and if caseloads continue to diminish, and caregiving responsibilities should ease if most students return to in-person instruction in the fall. With federal pandemic UI programs slated to end in September and many states withdrawing from them in advance of their nationwide expiration, any effects of enhanced UI benefits on labor force participation will likely wane soon as well. The spate of retirements spurred by the pandemic will continue to weigh on labor force participation for some time, but this factor should leave a gradually diminishing imprint over the next few years, because these workers were likely poised to retire soon even in the absence of the pandemic. The full effect of the pandemic on the structure of the labor market remains to be seen, and the characteristics of maximum employment may well be different from those of early 2020.Recent Inflation DevelopmentsSince the beginning of this year, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation—as measured by 12-month percent changes—has increased markedly, reaching 3.9 percent in May. The sharp increase in inflation this year reflects both a rebound in prices from pandemic-induced price declines last spring and imbalances between demand and supply associated with a strong increase in aggregate demand amid supply chain bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints. As global demand has surged, prices for crude oil and other traded commodities, such as livestock, crops, and metals, have increased notably. Commodity prices started to rebound during the second half of last year as the global economy partially reopened and have continued to rise this year, in some cases reaching multiyear highs. These prices most directly affect food and energy consumer prices. However, readings from manufacturing surveys and anecdotes reported in the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book suggest rising costs for raw materials have contributed to inflation for other goods as well. More recently, prices of some commodities, such as lumber, have come down from their peaks in the spring or have flattened out, suggesting that inflation pressures from commodities might ease in the coming months or even reverse. Supply chain bottlenecks are another factor pushing up consumer prices this year. As the economy reopened and as consumer demand for goods surged, many producers have reported shortages of critical parts and packaging materials, as well as delivery delays. (See the box “Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade.”) Supply chain bottlenecks have been particularly constraining in the motor vehicle sector, where global shortages of semiconductors and other parts have curtailed production, at the same time that demand by households and rental companies has been strong. Prices for motor vehicles—particularly used vehicles—have jumped in recent months and are currently at levels well above their pre-COvID-19 trends. Strong demand amid supply chain bottlenecks has also boosted prices for other durable goods in recent months, but the pattern is not quite as pronounced as it is for motor vehicles In fact, the rise in prices connected to the motor vehicle sector—including prices for new and used vehicle purchases and vehicle rental services—accounts for almost one-third of the increase in PCE prices in April and May. Regarding services prices, demand for certain nonenergy services that were severely curtailed by social distancing during the pandemic has surged this spring as the vaccines have become widely available.  Just as the drop in demand last year led to a step-down in prices for categories related to travel and group activities, the resurgence in demand for these services is pushing up prices this year. As two prominent examples, airline fares and prices for hotel accommodations have jumped since the beginning of the year but so far remain somewhat below their preCOVID trends. Even as demand for services appears to be strong and growing, many service-sector businesses have reported difficulties in finding workers quickly enough to ramp up their operations accordingly. These reports are consistent with most available measures of wage growth, which have stepped up notably since the beginning of the year. Wage gains have been especially large in the leisure and hospitality sector and in other service industries that have relatively low average wages, which has likely contributed to the rise in inflation for certain categories of spending, such as food away from home.overall, an important part of the rise in inflation this spring appears to be due to a surge in demand, including the rebound in travel-related spending, running up against short-run production bottlenecks and hiring difficulties. as these extraordinary circumstances pass, supply and demand should become better aligned, and inflation is widely expected to move down toward the FOMC’s 2 percent longerrun goal. (For a more detailed discussion of recent developments in inflation expectations, see the box “assessing the recent rise in inflation expectations.”)Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and TradeThe strong U.S. demand for goods has been faced with a supply chain that has struggled to keep pace. With the onset of the pandemic in the spring of 2020, many manufacturers sharply curtailed production in expectation of a long downturn and a drawn-out recovery. Companies laid off workers, idled plants, and canceled orders for materials. In many cases, however, the pause in demand was much shorter and the rebound in demand was much stronger than anticipated, and by late 2020, factories in some industries were scrambling to find the workers, parts, and materials to fill a rush of new orders. As demand for goods surged in the second half of 2020, U.S. import volumes shot up to record levels and have remained elevated . The massive influx of goods combined with COvID-19-related staffing issues have overwhelmed U.S. ports, resulting in additional challenges for manufacturers that experience extended wait times for imported parts. Ample evidence—including widespread anecdotes of shortages mentioned in the press and in the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book—points to broad and sometimes deep supply chain disruptions across the manufacturing sector. The challenges in procuring materials are also reflected in reports from the Institute for Supply Management on order backlogs, which recently reached historical highs at the same time as customer inventories were at historical lows. Additionally, roughly one-fourth of all manufacturers cannot produce at full capacity because of an insufficient supply of materials, labor, or both. Amid strong demand, these shortages have put upward pressure on the prices manufacturers pay for parts and materials. A few key manufacturing industries have experienced pronounced supply disruptions or shortfalls. Perhaps most notably, the burst in demand for consumer electronics contributed to full order books, long lead times, and shortages of semiconductors; these shortages led to widespread shutdowns and slowdowns at several U.S. motor vehicle assembly plants. Lumber supply has also fallen short, as last year’s increase in remodeling projects and new home construction outpaced production at sawmills. Meanwhile, supply bottlenecks for steel emerged last fall after a resurgence in orders surprised mill operators that had not yet fully restarted steelmaking equipment idled in the early days of the pandemic. Finally, extremely cold temperatures in mid-February caused extensive damage to several petrochemical facilities along the Gulf Coast, resulting in acute shortages; the outages resolved slowly, and only in early May did operations essentially return to normal. Logjams at some of the nation’s ports—particularly on the West Coast—resulted from the unprecedented volume of imports and were compounded by limitations on labor attributable to COvID-19 precautions and to isolated outbreaks among dock workers. For example, since the fall of 2020, the Port of Los Angeles, the nation’s busiest port, has had more ships to unload than it could easily accommodate. Typically, ships have little to no wait before they reach a berth at the port, but since last October, on average, more than 10 ships have been waiting at anchor at any given time. While this number has retreated from its peak, ships are still spending an extended time in the port. Continued high import volumes have hampered the port’s progress in resolving congestion even as the quick pace of vaccinations in the United States has allowed the port to resume processing incoming containers at full capacity. In addition to the congestion at ports, carriers have raised shipping rates and imposed large surcharges on containers sent to the United States. These delays and elevated costs have likely discouraged additional imports of low-value, high-volume products, contributing to higher prices and reduced inputs for U.S. manufacturers. Relatedly, the higher inbound rates have created a challenge for U.S. exports in the form of a container shortage. Shipping rates for U.S. exports have risen by much less than rates for inbound shipments, so carriers find it more profitable at times to quickly return empty containers for another inbound U.S. delivery than to receive modest revenue from taking on U.S. exports. Thus, although the number of inbound loaded containers skyrocketed in the second half of last year, the number of outbound loaded containers stayed below pre-pandemic levels until March 2021. In summary, trade and production bottlenecks have been an important factor as the economy emerges from the pandemic. As producers and the distribution network work through these bottlenecks, production is expected to pick up and price pressures to ease—for example, lumber prices have come down from their late-spring peaks. The time frame for the resolution of these bottlenecks is uncertain, as they reflect both the global supply chain and some industry-specific reasons for the tight conditions.Assessing the Recent Rise in Inflation ExpectationsThe sharp rise in inflation so far this year (see the box “Recent Inflation Developments”) has raised the question of whether the recent elevated pace of price increases (1) will abate, as the effects of the strong rebound in aggregate demand and accompanying supply chain bottlenecks fade, without calling for a change in the path of monetary policy or (2) will instead be followed by a period of higher inflation pressures and call for a change in the stance of monetary policy. The latter situation could arise if longer-term inflation expectations were to rise persistently above levels consistent with the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run inflation goal. Inflation expectations are often seen as a driver of actual inflation, which is why a fundamental aspect of the FOMC’s monetary policy framework is for longerterm inflation expectations to be well anchored at the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective. In monitoring the inflation outlook, the FOMC considers a variety of financial and economic data in order to gauge whether inflation expectations are consistent with meeting its inflation objective. Recent readings on these measures indicate that inflation is expected to return to levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective after a period of temporarily higher inflation. That said, some measures suggest that the upside risks to the inflation outlook in the near term have increased. Information concerning inflation expectations can be obtained from various sources, including financial instruments linked to inflation and surveys of financial market participants, professional forecasters, households, and businesses. For example, the compensation that investors require to hold certain financial instruments whose payouts are linked to inflation sheds light on financial market participants’ expectations regarding inflation. Inflation compensation implied by the yields on Treasury securities, known as the Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) breakeven inflation rate, is defined as the difference between yields on conventional Treasury securities and yields on TIPS, which are linked to actual outcomes regarding headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation. An alternative market-based measure of inflation compensation can be derived from inflation swaps, which are contracts in which two parties agree to swap fixed nominal payments for floating cash flows that are tied to cumulative CPI inflation over some horizon. Longer-horizon TIPS- and swaps-based measures of inflation compensation have both moved up since the start of the year. The TIPS-based measure of 10-year inflation compensation increased from an annual rate close to 2 percent in the beginning of 2021 to somewhat above 2¼ percent in early July. Over the same period, the swaps-based measure increased from around 2¼ percent to 2½ percent. To shed further light on how the recent economic developments are influencing investors’ views on the inflation rate likely to prevail at different horizons, it is useful to split the recent rise in inflation compensation over the next 10 years into changes in inflation compensation for the next year and for subsequent 1-year periods starting at times between 1 and 9 years from now. The result of this exercise suggests that market-based measures of inflation compensation over the next year have increased about 1½ percentage points since early 2021, reaching levels above 3 percent in early July. Measures of inflation compensation for the period beyond the next year have also moved up but by a much smaller amount than have measures of 1-year inflation compensation. In particular, inflation compensation beyond five years has reversed the large declines seen earlier in the pandemic, bouncing back to levels consistent with those observed before 2014, when measures of longer-term inflation compensation ran modestly above 2 percent on a CPI basis, and before these measures showed signs that CPI inflation expectations may have drifted down. If the recent readings on inflation compensation could be interpreted as direct measures of expected CPI inflation, they would suggest that investors currently anticipate that average CPI inflation will temporarily run somewhat above 3 percent over the next year before moving back down. Over the longer run, assuming no wedge between inflation compensation and inflation expectations, market-based measures indicate that investors are expecting CPI inflation to settle at around 2¼ percent. This pattern is consistent with expectations of CPI inflation moving to levels in line with the FOMC’s longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation. TIPS- and swaps-based measures of inflation compensation, however, reflect not only expected inflation, but also other factors, including the inflation risk premium and possibly other premiums driven by liquidity differences and shifts in demand and supply of TIPS relative to those of nominal Treasury securities. The presence of these additional factors can make it difficult to ascertain the information regarding expected inflation embedded in market-based measures of inflation compensation.3 Survey-based measures, in contrast, provide information about inflation expectations that is not obscured by the presence of these risk premiums. Information about inflation expectations obtained from surveys of financial market participants, economists, and professional forecasters tells a story similar to that of market-based measures. Since the turn of the year, projections of PCE inflation for 2021 as a whole, obtained from information in the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Survey of Primary Dealers, increased substantially to well above 2 percent. Over the same period, the projections of PCE inflation beyond 2022 appear, in comparison, to be little changed at levels just over 2 percent. This pattern suggests that these forecasters expect the recent jump in inflation to be transitory and that survey respondents do not appear to have revised their views regarding the longer-term inflation rate in response to the recent strong readings on inflation. Even if financial market participants and professional forecasters see inflation returning to levels close to 2 percent after a bout of higher inflation as the most likely outcome, they still could have judged that the likelihood of higher inflation had increased. Probability distributions of future inflation derived from surveys provide information on how respondents’ views about the likelihood of various outcomes for inflation have evolved. Since the turn of the year, the probability distribution of PCE inflation for 2022 derived from the Survey of Professional Forecasters suggests that the average respondent now appears to attach lower probabilities to outcomes of inflation below 2 percent, and somewhat higher odds of inflation running above 3 percent, which suggests that respondents’ perceived upside risks to inflation in the near term have shifted up somewhat. Finally, survey-based measures of households’ inflation expectations have also moved up in recent months. And, similarly to the other surveys, the movements have been more pronounced in the near- to medium-term inflation expectations. In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, households’ expectations for inflation over the next 12 months in June were markedly higher than in February and well above the expectations for average inflation over the next 5 to 10 years. Over the same period, the median value of inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years picked up only slightly. Nevertheless, the latest reading is above its pre-pandemic level and stands close to levels last seen consistently in 2015 when this measure started drifting down and raised concerns that households’ expectations might have slipped below the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run goal. In the Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents’ expected inflation rate 3 years ahead also increased sharply in May, the highest reading since the summer of 2013. The common inflation expectations (CIE) index constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff—a series that takes many measures of inflation expectations and inflation compensation and consolidates them into a single indicator—has continued to edge up in recent quarters, more than reversing the moderate decline recorded in the middle of last year. Taking a somewhat longer view, the CIE has now also reversed the net decline since 2014 and has brought the index up to levels that are likely more consistent with the FOMC’s longer-term goal of 2 percent PCE inflation.Developments Related to Financial StabilityWhile some financial vulnerabilities have increased since February, the institutions at the core of the financial system remain resilient. This discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the financial sector, and funding risks. Prices of risky assets have generally increased in the first half of 2021. They have been buoyed by the rapid deployment of highly effective COvID-19 vaccines in the United States, the support provided by fiscal policy, and increased investor risk appetite. Broad equity market indexes have reached record highs in recent months, and the ratio of prices to forecasts of earnings remains high relative to its historical distribution. Option-implied volatility has been declining throughout the first half of 2021 and now stands at about its historical median. yields on corporate bonds and leveraged loans remain low. On balance, indicators of commercial real estate (CRE) valuations remain high; however, low transaction volumes— especially for distressed properties—may mask declines in commercial property values. Supported by relatively low mortgage rates and shifting supply and demand dynamics brought about by the pandemic, house prices have increased at double-digit annual rates for several months amid strong home sales. The surge in the prices of a variety of crypto-assets also reflects in part increased risk appetite. Long-term Treasury yields have risen since mid-February but remain low by historical standards. The high asset prices in part reflect the continued low level of Treasury yields. However, valuations for some assets are elevated relative to historical norms even when using measures that account for Treasury yields. Asset prices may be vulnerable to significant declines should investor risk appetite fall, interest rates rise unexpectedly, or the recovery stall. vulnerabilities from both business and household debt have declined through the first quarter of 2021, reflecting a slower pace of business borrowing, an improvement in business earnings, and government programs that have supported business and household incomes. Even so, some businesses and households remain under considerable strain. Business debt outstanding changed little in the second half of 2020 and first quarter of 2021, although it remains high relative to gross domestic product. Recovering earnings and the low level of interest rates have generally aided businesses’ ability to carry debt. Some smaller businesses continue to face significant financial strains but have been supported by government programs, including the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Debt owed by households remains at a moderate level relative to income. Household borrowing continues to be heavily concentrated among borrowers with high credit scores. Moreover, government actions taken in response to the pandemic have provided significant support to household balance sheets and incomes, with many households saving more and holding more liquid assets. In the financial sector, leverage at banks and broker-dealers remained low, while leverage at hedge funds and life insurance companies continued to be high. The common equity Tier 1 ratio for most banks increased, on net, over 2020 and into the first quarter of 2021. Measures of credit quality of bank loans have also improved in the first quarter of 2021. Moreover, the share of loan balances in loss-mitigation programs at the largest banks has declined. The shares of credit cards and auto loans in loss mitigation have seen larger declines, while the shares of residential real estate, commercial and industrial, and CRE loans remain high. Nevertheless, some uncertainty remains about the ability of borrowers in loss-mitigation programs to meet their obligations after those programs end and government support runs out. Broker-dealer leverage remained near historically low levels through the first quarter of 2021, although dealers continue to fi nance sizable inventories of Treasury securities. No notable effect on Treasury market functioning followed the expiration in March 2021 of temporary changes to the supplementary leverage ratio, which were implemented to ease strains in Treasury market intermediation in the initial weeks of the pandemic. Most measures of hedge fund leverage increased in the second half of 2020 into the beginning of 2021 and are now above their historical averages. A few recent episodes have highlighted the opacity of risky exposures and the need for greater transparency at hedge funds and other leveraged financial entities that can transmit stress to the financial system. The Financial Stability Oversight Council has restarted its Hedge Fund Working Group to improve data sharing, identify risks, and strengthen the financial system. Leverage at life insurance companies remains historically high as of the first quarter of 2021. Issuance volumes of non-agency securities recovered somewhat in the first quarter of 2021, although the recovery was uneven across asset classes. Collateralized loan obligation and asset-backed securities issuance was elevated, whereas non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities issuance was weak. Funding risks at domestic banks remained low, as these banks rely only modestly on short-term wholesale funding and maintain sizable holdings of high-quality liquid assets. Liquidity ratios were well above regulatory requirements at most large domestic banks as of the first quarter of 2021. Assets under management at prime and tax-exempt money market funds (MMFs) have declined since the middle of 2020, but vulnerabilities at these funds remain and call for structural fixes. The President’s Working Group on Financial Markets released a report in December 2020 outlining potential reforms to address risks from the MMF sector. Subsequently, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued a request for comment on these potential reforms and summarized its findings. If properly calibrated, some of these reforms—such as swing pricing, a minimum balance at risk, and capital buffers—could significantly reduce the run risk associated with MMFs. Meanwhile, the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility and the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, which were deployed during the COvID-19 pandemic to backstop short-term funding markets, expired at the end of March with no material effect on these markets. Bond and bank loan mutual funds benefited from net inflows but are exposed to risks due to large holdings of illiquid assets. A routine survey of market contacts on salient shocks to financial stability highlights several important risks. A worsening of the global pandemic could stress the financial systems in emerging markets and some European countries. Further, if global interest rates were to rise abruptly, some emerging market economies could experience additional fiscal strains. These risks, if realized, could interact with financial vulnerabilities and pose additional risks to the U.S. financial system. Developments Associated with Facilities to Support the Economy during the COVID-19 Crisis In the immediate wake of the pandemic, the Federal Reserve took forceful actions and established emergency lending facilities, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury as needed. These actions and facilities supported the fl ow of credit to households and businesses and served as backstop measures that have given investors confidence that support would be available should conditions deteriorate substantially. Most of the facilities established at the onset of the pandemic expired at the end of December 2020, the beginning of January 2021, or the end of March 2021. These facilities expired with no notable effect on financial market functioning.The termination date of the Federal Reserve’s Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, which currently has $90.6 billion in loans outstanding funded to the PPP, was extended to July 30, 2021. The Federal Reserve has begun winding down the portfolio of the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, an emergency lending facility that closed on December 31, 2020. The portfolio sales have been gradual and orderly and have aimed to minimize the potential for any adverse effect on market functioning by taking into account daily liquidity and trading conditions for exchange-traded funds and corporate bonds. To date, these sales have had no notable effect on mutual fund flows or price effects in the market. The Federal Reserve also took actions to reduce spillovers to the U.S. economy from foreign financial stresses. Temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines were established in March 2020, in addition to the preexisting standing lines, and have improved liquidity conditions in dollar funding markets in the United States and abroad by providing foreign central banks with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market stress. The FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility has helped support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars to a broad range of countries, many of which do not have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve recently announced the extension of its temporary swap lines through December 31, 2021, which should help sustain improvements in global U.S. dollar funding markets.Monetary Policy Rules, the Effective Lower Bound, and the Economic RecoverySimple interest rate rules relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the deviation of inflation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. Policymakers consult prescriptions of the policy interest rate derived from a variety of policy rules for guidance, without mechanically following the prescriptions of any particular rule. This discussion examines the prescriptions of a number of interest rate rules. One simplification these rules typically adopt is ignoring the effective lower bound (ELB) on interest rates, and many of the rules have prescribed negative values for the federal funds rate since the onset of the pandemicdriven recession. Most rules analyzed in the research literature respond to deviations—both positive and negative— of resource utilization from its trend level because they were informed by historical periods and economic models in which high resource utilization is accompanied by inflation pressure. By contrast, the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy indicates that policymakers would not respond to high employment unless it was accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Accordingly, this discussion examines—in addition to the prescriptions of a number of commonly studied monetary policy rules—the prescriptions of a modified simple rule that, all else being equal, does not mechanically call for policy rate increases as unemployment drops below its estimated longer-run level. Policy Rules: Some Key Design Principles and Limitations In many stylized models of the economy, desirable economic outcomes can be achieved by following a monetary policy rule that incorporates key principles of good monetary policy. One such principle is that monetary policy should respond in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions, thus fostering public understanding of policymakers’ goals and strategy. A second principle is that, to stabilize inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted over time in response to persistent increases or decreases in inflation to an extent sufficient to ensure a return of inflation to the central bank’s longer-run objective. Simple monetary policy rules also have important limitations. As noted earlier, simple rules do not typically recognize that the ELB limits the extent to which the policy rate can be lowered to support the economy, which may impart a downward bias to both employment and inflation. To mitigate the challenges posed by the ELB and anchor longer-term inflation expectations at 2 percent, the Committee indicates in its statement that it “seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time.” None of the simple rules analyzed in this discussion include any mechanism to offset the downward bias in inflation imposed by the ELB. As such, they do not reflect these important aspects of the FOMC’s monetary policy strategy.Another limitation is that simple rules respond to only a small set of economic variables and thus necessarily abstract from many of the considerations that the FOMC takes into account. For example, a simple rule might respond to movements in a specific labor market indicator, such as the overall unemployment rate. However, no single labor market indicator can precisely capture the size of the shortfall from maximum employment or identify when a strong labor market can be sustained without putting undue upward pressure on inflation; many labor market indicators must be assessed. Similarly, simple policy rules that systematically call for increases in the policy rate as slack in the labor market diminishes might fail to recognize the benefits of sustaining a strong labor market. Finally, simple rules for the policy rate do not explicitly recognize that the monetary policy toolkit includes other tools—notably, large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance, which are especially relevant when the policy rate is constrained by the ELB. (See the box “Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Markets.”) Policy Rules: Descriptions Economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, and the “first difference” rule. In addition to these rules, figure A shows a “balanced approach (shortfalls)” rule, which represents one simple way to illustrate the Committee’s focus on shortfalls from maximum employment. All of the policy rules analyzed in this discussion embody the key principles of good monetary policy previously noted as well as the important limitations. All five rules feature the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an estimate of the rate of unemployment in the longer run (ut LR) and the current unemployment rate; the first-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment rate gap rather than its level. All of the rules abstract from the uncertainty that surrounds estimates of the unemployment rate gap. In addition, all of the rules include the difference between inflation and the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. All but the first-difference rule include an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt LR). By construction, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule prescribes identical policy rates to those prescribed by the balanced-approach rule at times when the unemployment rate is above its estimated longer-run level. However, when the unemployment rate is below that level, the balanced-approach (shortfalls) rule is more accommodative than the balanced-approach rule because it does not call for the policy rate to rise as the unemployment rate drops further. Unlike the other simple rules featured here, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below the ELB. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in accommodation following a recession during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its ELB, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule prescribes delaying the return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule until after the economy begins to recover.Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate from the five rules. For each period, the figure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules, taking as given the prevailing economic conditions and estimates of ut LR and rt LR at the time. The four rules whose formulas do not impose a lower bound on the value of the federal funds rate imply prescriptions of strongly negative policy rates in response to the pandemic-driven recession, well below their respective troughs in the 2008–09 recession. The prescriptions of the balanced-approach and balancedapproach (shortfalls) rules are the most negative because these rules call for relatively large responses to resource slack. The negative prescriptions of the four rules show the extent to which policymakers’ ability to support the economy through reductions in the federal funds rate has been constrained by the ELB during the pandemic-driven recession—a constraint that underlines the importance of the FOMC’s other policy actions at the time, including forward guidance about the federal funds rate and large-scale asset purchases.Regarding the recovery from the 2008–09 recession, all of the simple rules shown here prescribed departure from the ELB well before the FOMC determined that it was appropriate to raise the federal funds rate. The FOMC judged, on the basis of a wide range of information available at the time, that it was appropriate to maintain a more accommodative path of the federal funds rate than prescribed by these rules. Similarly, in the aftermath of the pandemic-driven recession, the FOMC has been drawing from a broad range of indicators, analyses, and judgments in making its determinations concerning the appropriate stance for monetary policy, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. Under the FOMC’s flexible form of average inflation targeting, departure from the ELB might be delayed relative to the simple rules by the desire to see inflation run moderately above 2 percent for some time. While the simple rules are concerned with period-by-period inflation, the Committee aims for a sustained return of inflation to the 2 percent objective.Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money Marketsthe Federal reserve’s asset purchases since March 2020 have resulted in a large and rapid expansion of the Federal reserve’s balance sheet. Federal reserve assets totaled $4.2 trillion before the pandemic in January 2020 and have since grown to $8.1 trillion. as net asset purchases proceed at a pace of $120 billion per month, the Federal reserve’s total liabilities increase correspondingly. alongside this growth in aggregate liabilities arising from asset purchases, there have also been large compositional shifts between liabilities this year due to factors that are not directly related to monetary policy decisions. this discussion reviews recent developments in the Federal reserve’s balance sheet and associated changes in money market conditions. reserve balances are the largest liability on the Federal reserve’s balance sheet. Federal reserve asset purchases are settled by adding reserves to the banking system; thus, the magnitude of asset purchases since the onset of the pandemic has brought reserves to record levels. reserves grew substantially earlier this year, from $3.1 trillion in early January to $3.9 trillion by early april. the level of reserves was, however, mostly stable from april to June 2021, reflecting growth in other liabilities such as the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrP) facility. in light of the Federal reserve’s role as fiscal agent for the federal government, the U.S. treasury holds balances in the treasury General account (tGa), which is another liability on the Federal reserve’s balance sheet. changes in the tGa affect other Federal reserve liabilities such as reserves and may have implications for money market conditions. a reduction in the tGa increases the level of reserves, other things being equal, as the treasury makes payments to individuals and businesses, which may increase private deposits in the banking system. an important recent development in this regard has been the substantial drawdown of the tGa over the first half of 2021. With the enactment multiple rounds of federal legislation in 2020 and 2021, the treasury’s balance in the tGa increased to unprecedentedly high levels. as shown in figure c, as the bulk of the most recent fiscal stimulus payments and tax refunds came to an end, the treasury lowered its outstanding balance in the tGa from about $1.6 trillion at the end of January 2020 to about $850 billion by the end of June 2021. as the treasury sought to reduce its tGa balance, the treasury also lowered its net issuance of treasury bills substantially in 2021. the developments with reserves, the tGa, and treasury bill issuance have affected money markets in 2021. the recent large increases in reserves, resulting from both asset purchases and reductions in the tGa, have put broad but modest downward pressure on short-term interest rates over recent months. additionally, the net declines in treasury bill supply have put downward pressure on bill yields, which similarly affected rates on close substitutes to bills such as repurchase agreements (repos) collateralized by treasury securities. in this environment of ample liquidity and downward pressure on money market rates, the Federal reserve’s on rrP facility has seen a historically large increase in usage since april 2021, primarily driven by greater participation from government money market funds. take-up at the on rrP facility reached record levels—nearly $1 trillion by the end of June 2021. in light of the potential for expanded use of the facility and given growth in money market fund assets under management in recent years, the Federal open Market committee (FoMc) raised the per-counterparty cap on on rrP participation to $80 billion per day from $30 billion at the March 2021 FoMc meeting. With the increase in usage, the on rrP facility continuedto serve its intended purpose of helping to provide a fl oor under short-term interest rates. the recent spike in facility usage reflected government money market funds turning to the facility because of their large infl ows. certain banks reportedly sought to limit further growth of their reserve holdings and of certain deposit liabilities. this phenomenon has reportedly been important in recent months in driving additional inflows into money market funds in lieu of bank deposits. additionally, money market funds faced a relative lack of eligible short-term investments amid declining treasury bill supply and reduced demand for repo funding on the part of borrowers. in this situation, the on rrP has provided money market funds with an additional investment option for these inflows despite its offering rate being at 0 percent through mid-June. other deposits, another liability on the Federal reserve’s balance sheet, include deposits from government-sponsored enterprises (GSes) and designated financial market utilities. these deposits roughly doubled since the beginning of 2021 to $408 billion by mid-June, reflecting in part the same money market conditions that drove higher on rrP take-up. Following the June 2021 FoMc meeting, the Federal reserve made a technical adjustment to its administered rates: interest on excess reserves and the on rrP offering rate. Both rates were increased 5 basis points in order to keep the federal funds rate well within the FoMc’s target range and to support smooth functioning of short-term funding markets. on rrP take-up rose substantially over subsequent days. this increase reflected shifts to the on rrP from GSes’ deposits at the Federal reserve that do not earn interest as well as additional participation from money market funds. Following the technical adjustment, short-term market interest rates adjusted slightly higher, largely in step with the increase in administered rates. the effective federal funds rate rose to 10 basis points, while the Secured overnight Financing rate increased to 5 basis points.Forecast UncertaintyThe economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second and third years. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those figures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of shortterm interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years.
Summary U.S. economic activity posted further impressive gains in the second half of last year, but inflation rose to its highest level since the early 1980s. The labor market tightened substantially further amid high demand for workers and constrained supply, with the unemployment rate reaching the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level and nominal wages rising at their fastest pace in decades. With demand strong, and amid ongoing supply chain bottlenecks and constrained labor supply, inflation increased appreciably last year, running well above the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent and broadening out to a wider range of items. As 2022 began, the rapid spread of the Omicron variant appeared to be causing a slowdown in some sectors of the economy, but with Omicron cases having declined sharply since mid-January, the slowdown is expected to be brief. Over the second half of last year, the FOMC held its policy rate near zero to support the continued economic recovery. The Committee began phasing out net asset purchases in November and accelerated the pace of the phaseout in December; net asset purchases will end in early March. With inflation well above the FOMC’s longer-run objective and a strong labor market, the Committee expects it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. Recent Economic and Financial Developments Economic activity and the labor market. In the second half of 2021, gross domestic product (GDP) growth slowed somewhat from its brisk first-half pace but nevertheless rose at a solid annualized rate of 4.6 percent. Average monthly job gains remained robust at 575,000 in the second half. The unemployment rate has plummeted almost 2 percentage points since June and, at 4 percent in January, has reached the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Moreover, unemployment declines have been widespread across demographic groups. That said, labor force participation only crept up last year and remains constrained. The tight labor supply, in conjunction with a continued surge in labor demand, has resulted in strong nominal wage growth, especially for low-wage workers. Supply bottlenecks also continued to significantly limit activity throughout the second half, while the Delta and Omicron waves led to notable, but apparently temporary, slowdowns in activity. Inflation. The personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index rose 5.8 percent over the 12 months ending in December, and the index that excludes food and energy items (so-called core inflation) was up 4.9 percent—the highest readings for both measures in roughly 40 years. Upward pressure on inflation from prices of goods experiencing both supply chain bottlenecks and strong demand, such as motor vehicles and furniture, has persisted, and elevated inflation has broadened out to a wider range of items. Services inflation has also stepped up further, reflecting strong wage growth in some service sectors and a significant increase in housing rents. While measures of near-term inflation expectations moved substantially higher over the course of last year, measures of longer-term inflation expectations have moved up only modestly; they remain in the range observed over the decade before the pandemic and thus appear broadly consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent. Financial conditions. Yields on nominal Treasury securities across maturities increased notably since mid-2021, with much of the increase having occurred in the past couple of months, as the expected timing for the beginning of the removal of monetary policy accommodation has moved forward significantly. Equity prices decreased slightly, on net, and corporate bond yields rose but remain low, with stable corporate credit quality. Financing conditions for consumer credit continue to be largely accommodative except for borrowers with low credit scores. Mortgage rates for households remain low despite recent increases. Bank lending standards have eased across most loan categories, and bank credit has expanded. All told, financing conditions have been accommodative for businesses and households. Financial stability. While some financial vulnerabilities remain elevated, the large banks at the core of the financial system continue to be resilient. Measures of valuation pressures on risky assets remain high compared with historical values. Nonfinancial-sector leverage has broadly declined, and credit growth in the household sector has been driven almost exclusively by residential mortgages and auto loans to prime-rated borrowers. Vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage are within their historical range, with relatively lower leverage at banks partially offset by higher leverage at life insurers and hedge funds. Funding markets remain stable. Domestic banks continue to maintain significant levels of high-quality liquid assets, while assets under management at prime and tax-exempt money market funds have declined further since mid-2021. The Federal Reserve continues to evaluate the potential systemic risks posed by hedge funds and digital assets and is closely monitoring the transition away from LIBOR. International developments. Foreign GDP has continued to recover briskly, on balance, despite successive waves of the pandemic, which have been mirrored in slowdowns and rebounds in economic activity. This recovery has been supported by vaccination rates that have steadily increased in both advanced foreign economies and emerging market economies (EMEs). Inflation rose notably in many economies in the second half of last year, importantly boosted by higher energy and other commodity prices as well as supply chain constraints. Several emerging market foreign central banks and a few advancedeconomy foreign central banks have raised policy rates, though foreign monetary and fiscal policies have generally continued to be accommodative. Foreign financial conditions have tightened modestly but are generally contained. In advanced foreign economies, sovereign yields have increased since the first half of last year on firming expectations for higher policy rates. The change in financial conditions in EMEs has been relatively muted in the face of the shift in monetary policy in some advanced economies. The trade-weighted value of the dollar appreciated modestly, on net, over the past six months. Recent geopolitical tensions related to the Russia–Ukraine situation are a source of uncertainty in global financial and commodity markets. Monetary Policy Interest rate policy. The FOMC has continued to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent since the previous Monetary Policy Report. With inflation well above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal and a strong labor market, the Committee expects it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. Balance sheet policy. From June 2020 until November 2021, the Federal Reserve expanded its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by $40 billion per month. In December 2020, the Committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of securities at least at this pace until the economy had made substantial further progress toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Last November, the Committeejudged that this criterion had been achieved and began to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases. In December, in light of inflation developments and further improvements in the labor market, the Committee announced it would double the pace of reductions in its monthly net asset purchases. At its January meeting, the FOMC decided to continue to reduce its net asset purchases at this accelerated pace, which will bring them to an end in early March, and issued a statement of principles for its planned approach for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. A number of participants at the meeting commented that conditions would likely warrant beginning to reduce the size of the balance sheet sometime later this year. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee is firmly committed to its pricestability and maximum-employment goals and is prepared to use its tools to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched while promoting a sustainable expansion and strong labor market. Special Topics Low labor supply. Labor supply has been slow to rebound even as labor demand has been remarkably strong. The labor force participation rate remains well below estimates of its longer-run trend, principally reflecting a wave of retirements among older individuals and increases in the number of people out of the labor force and engaged in caregiving responsibilities. The ongoing pandemic has also affected labor supply through fear of the virus or the need to quarantine. Moreover, savings buffers accumulated during the pandemic may have enabled some people to remain out of the labor force. Wage and employment growth across jobs and workers. Wage and employment gains were widespread across jobs and industries last year, with the lowest-wage jobs experiencing the largest gains in both median wages and employment. Wage growth in the leisure and hospitality industry accelerated sharply, which, together with a lagging employment rebound and high job openings, suggests a lack of available workers in the industry. Median wages also increased across racial and ethnic groups, leaving differences in wage levels across groups little changed relative to 2019. Broadening of inflation. Higher PCE price inflation broadened out over the course of 2021, with the share of products experiencing notable price increases moving appreciably higher. The broadening was evident in both goods and services, though most of last year’s very high inflation readings were concentrated in goods, a reflection of the strong demand and supply bottlenecks that have particularly affected these items. Supply bottlenecks. Supply chain bottlenecks have plagued the economy for much of the past year. Against a backdrop of robust demand for goods, global distribution networks have been strained, and domestic manufacturers have had trouble finding the materials and labor needed to fill orders for their products. U.S. ports have been congested amid record volumes of shipping, and delivery times for materials have remained elevated. Supply shortages of semiconductors have been particularly acute and have weighed heavilyon motor vehicle production and sales. While there are some signs of improvement, general supply chain bottlenecks are not expected to resolve for some time. Developments in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued to grow, albeit at a slower rate given the reduced monthly pace of net asset purchases since November. However, reserve balances—the largest liability on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—were little changed, on net, reflecting growth in nonreserve liabilities such as currency and overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRP). The elevated level of reserves continued to put broad downward pressure on short-term interest rates, while the decline in Treasury bill supply over 2021 has contributed to a shortage of shortterm investments. Amid these developments, the ON RRP facility continued to serve its intended purpose of helping to provide a floor under short-term interest rates and support effective implementation of monetary policy. Part 1 Recent Economic and Financial DevelopmentsDomestic Developments The labor market has continued to recover rapidly Payroll employment increased by 3.5 million jobs in the second half of 2021, bringing the gains for the year to a robust 6.7 million. And despite the headwind caused by the Omicron wave, employment growth in January remained robust at 467,000. Payroll gains over the past year have been widespread across industries, with a particularly large increase in the leisure and hospitality sector as people continued their return to many activities that had been curtailed by the pandemic. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate continued to move down rapidly, declining from 6.7 percent at the end of 2020 to 4.0 percent this January. Notably, the nearly 2 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate since June of last year was the fastest half-year decline since the 1950s, apart from the unprecedented rebound when the economy first reopened in 2020. Moreover, this decline was broad based across racial and ethnic groups and was particularly large for Hispanics and African Americans. While these recent declines brought the gaps between Hispanic and African American unemployment rates and those of whites and Asians to near historic lows, the gaps nevertheless remain and largely reflect longstanding structural issues. Labor demand is very strong, but labor supply remains constrained . . . Last year’s job gains were driven by an appreciable and steady rise in labor demand as the economy reopened and activity bounced back. By the end of the year, the number of unfilled job openings was about 60 percent above pre-pandemic levels and at an all-time high. However, labor supply struggled tokeep up. In particular, the labor force participation rate—which measures the share of people either working or actively seeking work—moved up only a little over the past year and remains below its February 2020 level.3 Several pandemic-related factors appear to be holding back laborsupply, including a pandemic-induced surge in retirements, increased caregiving responsibilities, and fears of contracting COVID-19.As a result, the recovery in employment—though rapid—has been incomplete, with payrolls nearly 3 million below their pre-pandemic level as of January. . . . resulting in an extremely tight labor market . . . A wide range of indicators have been pointing to a very tight labor market, reflecting robust demand for workers and constrained supply. There were two job openings per unemployed person at year-end, the highest level on record. Both households’ and small businesses’ perceptions of labor market tightness were near or above the highest levels observed in the history of these series. The share of workers quitting jobs each month, an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects, climbed from 2.4 percent to 2.9 percent last year, reaching an all-time high. Moreover, employers continued to report widespread hiring difficulties. . . . and a broad-based acceleration in wages Measures of hourly labor compensation growth have risen sharply over the past year in nominal terms, reflecting the influences of strong labor demand and pandemicrelated reductions in labor supply. Total hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index, which includes both wages and benefits, rose at an annual rate of 5.2 percent in the second half of 2021, lifting the 12-month change to 4.4 percent, well above pre-pandemic rates. Wage growth as computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tracks the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey, has also been rising smartly, as have average hourly earnings and compensation per hour in the business sector.4 Indeed, nominal wages are increasing at the fastest pace in at least 20 years. This wage growth has been widespread across most sectors and particularly large in the leisure and hospitality sector and for lower-wage workers. Even so, in the aggregate, these wage gains did not keep pace with the rise in prices last year. Labor productivity also appears to have accelerated The extent to which sizable wage gains raise firms’ costs and act as a source of inflation pressure depends importantly on the pace of productivity growth. In that regard, the behavior of labor productivity since the start of the pandemic has been encouraging. Over the 2020–21 period, productivity growth in the business sector averaged 2.3 percent per year— about 1 percentage point faster than its average pace since the mid-2000s. Some of this acceleration in productivity might be the result of transitory factors. For example, worker effort, which surged in response to employment shortages and hiring difficulties, appears to be elevated, possibly above sustainable levels.5 But other pandemicrelated developments could have a more persistent effect on productivity growth. For example, the pandemic has resulted in a highrate of new business formation, the widespread adoption of remote work technology, and a wave of labor-saving investments. Nevertheless, it is too early to tell what the ultimate effect of the pandemic will be on productivity growth in coming years. Inflation increased significantly last year . . . Consumer prices posted further sizable increases in the second half of 2021. Monthly increases in personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices averaged about the same in the second half as in the first half, bringing the 12-month change in December to 5.8 percent—far above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent. The core PCE price index, which excludes the more volatile food and energy prices categories, rose 4.9 percent last year as supply chain bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints amid strong demand exerted pervasive upward pressure on prices. Notably, these were the largest price increases since the early 1980s. In January, a further sizable rise in the consumer price index (CPI) indicated that price pressures had not yet begun to abate. . . . and became more broad based in the second half . . . Whereas the sizable price increases seen last spring were concentrated in a few key items, inflationary pressures broadened over the second half of 2021. As an illustration, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas trimmed mean index, which removes the PCE categories with the largest price increases and decreases each month, rose only modestly in the first half of last year but picked up in the second half and increased 3.1 percent for the year as a whole— its highest reading since 1991. The broadening of price inflation is further evident when examining the price indexes for major PCE categories. In the first half of 2021, rising inflation was driven by sharp increases in prices for certain goods such as motor vehicles, which experienced strong demand coupled with severe supply chain bottlenecks; a recovery in demand for nonhousing services, where many prices rebounded after having softened earlier in the pandemic; and rapid increases in energy prices. In the second half, prices of those items continued to move higher, and prices began to rise more rapidly for food and beverages (as increases in the costs of food commodities, labor, and transportation were passed on to consumers) as well as for housing services (as rents began to reflect the large increase in housing demand). (See the box “How Widespread Has the Rise in Inflation Been?”) . . . with further upward pressure on inflation from rising commodity and import prices Oil prices continued climbing over the second half of last year and into this year, reaching their highest level in over seven years. Demand for oil rose as the global economy recovered further, and oil supply was constrained by U.S. oil production disruptions due to Hurricane Ida and by only modest production increases by OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and its partners. Geopolitical tensions with Russia have also contributed to higher energy prices, including oil and natural gas. Nonfuel commodity prices have risen with the global economic recovery since the first half of last year, reflecting considerable increases in the prices of both industrial metals and agricultural commodities. Although still below their peak last year, lumber prices have increased sharply again in recent months because of elevated demand from residential construction and supply disruptions. Import prices and the cost of transporting imported goods—a cost not included in measured import prices—are rising, and bottlenecks in supply chains have exacerbated the rise (see the box “Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and Trade”). Import price inflation has also remained elevated largely because of continued increases in commodity prices, bringing the 12-month change through January 2022 to 6.9 percent. Measures of near-term inflation expectations rose notably, but longerterm expectations moved up less Inflation expectations likely influence actual inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting decisions. In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, households’ expectations for inflation over the next 12 months continued to climb, reaching levels that are among the highest observed since the early 1980s. In contrast, expectations for average inflation over the next 5 to 10 years from the same survey flattened out in the second half of 2021 after having moved up modestly in the first half, and they now stand near levels observed about a decade ago. Meanwhile, 10-year PCE inflation expectations in the Survey of Professional Forecasters edged up, on net, since mid-2021 and stood at 2.2 percent in the first quarter of this year. That increase was driven by higher expectations for the next five years, with expectations for inflation remaining at 2 percent over years 6 through 10.Market-based measures of inflation compensation, which are based on financial instruments linked to inflation, are sending a similar message. A measure of CPI inflation compensation over the next five years implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) continued to rise, on net, through the second half of 2021, reaching its highest level over the past decade.6 In contrast, the TIPSbased measure of CPI inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead rose over the first half of 2021 but has settled around 2¼ to 2½ percent since then. While elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels, this measure is well within the range of values observed in the first half of the previous decade and, because CPI inflation tends to run around ¼ percentage point above PCE price inflation, it suggests inflation compensation close to 2 percent on a PCE basis. The common inflation expectations (CIE) index constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff combines a wide variety of inflation expectations measures—including the measures cited earlier—into a single indicator that is rescaled to match the level and volatility of existing inflation expectation indicators.The measures used in the CIE differ along several key dimensions—the type of economic agent, data source (survey- or market-based measure), time horizon, and inflation measure. Both CIE indexes shown in figure 12 look most similar to the measures of longer-term expectations: They trended up in the first half of last year, reversing the downward drift observed in the years before the pandemic, but then flattened out at a level similar to those observed roughly a decade ago. Gross domestic product growth stepped down modestly in the second half of last year . . . The level of real gross domestic product (GDP) recovered further in the second half of 2021, but growth was somewhat slower, on average, than in the first half. GDP growth is reported to have slowed notably to 2.3 percent at an annual rate in the third quarter but rebounded to a brisk 7 percent in the fourth quarter. Despite the solid average growth in the second half, several factors—including last summer’s Delta wave and waning fiscal stimulus—likely weighed on demand growth. Moreover, supply chain bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints continued to significantly restrain economic activity. While there have been some recent signs of these constraints easing, the time frame for further improvement is highly uncertain. All told, at the end of 2021 GDP stood 3 percent above its level in the fourth quarter of 2019, before the pandemic began, but 1.5 percent below its level if growth had continued at its average pace over the five years before the pandemic. . . . while the rapid spread of the Omicron variant appears to have slowed the pace of economic activity early this year Fueled by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, new cases of COVID-19 began rising sharply in mid-December, peaked in mid-January with daily cases about three times as high as last winter’s surge, and have fallen quickly since then. Although Omicron appears to cause less severe symptoms than previous variants, several indicators suggest it has damped the pace of economic activity early this year. High-frequency indicators reveal that flight cancellations, school closures, and temporary closings of small businesses jumped as the new year began, while demand for COVID-sensitive services like air travel, lodging, and restaurant meals flagged. Nevertheless, with cases rapidly declining and spending indicators having rebounded, Omicron seems likely to cause the continued reopening of the economy to slow only briefly. Real consumer spending growth eased . . . Consumer spending on goods edged lower, on balance, over the second half of 2021 as the boost from fiscal stimulus waned and low inventories held back purchases of some goods, particularly motor vehicles. Even so, goods spending remains quite elevated relative to its pre-pandemic trend. The further reopening of the economy boosted spending on services in the second half, albeit at a less rapid pace than last spring, as the Delta wave weighed on demand for in-person services in the summer and the Omicron wave began to do so late in the year. Despite the continued recovery in services spending, this spending remains well below its pre-pandemic trend. In all, the data over the second half of 2021 indicate only a moderate amount of rebalancing of consumer demand toward services and away from goods. . . . as higher prices damped otherwise healthy income and wealth positions . . . Real consumer spending has been supported by further gains in household income and wealth, but that support was curbed by the marked rise in prices over the past year, especially for households that have not benefited from higher asset prices. Household disposable income in nominal terms has proven resilient due to the improving labor market, even as fiscal stimulus has waned, but after factoring in the higher prices, real disposable incomes edged lower over the year. Nevertheless, also supporting consumption, in the aggregate, are the substantial savings households have accumulated from curtailed services spending and historic levels of household-focused fiscal stimulus distributed earlier in the pandemic, as evidenced by a personal saving rate that, while no longer elevated, has not fallen below its pre-pandemic trend. Furthermore, as a result of the large gains in home and equity prices since mid-2020, the wealth position of households that own these assets remains very solid. . . . and contributed to declining consumer sentiment Amid the continued acceleration in prices in the second half of last year and despite solid household balance sheets, a closely watched index of consumer sentiment plunged. Since the middle of 2021, the University of Michigan index fell below the levels seen at the onset of the pandemic, as survey respondents’ concerns over inflation weighed heavily on their outlooks. The Conference Board index, an alternative measure of consumer sentiment, also deteriorated but, in contrast to the Michigan index, remains well above its earlier pandemic lows. Meanwhile, consumer credit conditions continued to normalize Financing has been generally available to support these gains in consumer spending. Standards for consumer loans, which banks reported eased in 2021 relative to 2020, are now generally in line with the standards that persisted before the pandemic; as a result, financing conditions are now largely accommodative for borrowers with high credit scores, though lending standards and terms remain somewhat tighter than prepandemic levels for borrowers with low credit scores. After initial declines at the onset of the pandemic, the growth rate of consumer credit recovered strongly in 2021, driven by the continued expansion of auto loans and an appreciable rebound in credit card balances. Delinquency rates for nonprime auto and credit card borrowers remained well below pre-pandemic levels, likely stemming from forbearance programs and fiscal support. Housing construction fell as supply constraints held back activity . . . Residential investment is well above prepandemic levels but fell back somewhat last year, as construction was limited by persistent bottlenecks that led to materials shortages. In recent months, the sector has shown signs of a rebound, as single-family permits have risen steadily. Nevertheless, the timing of the resolution of these supply constraints remains highly uncertain. Prices of lumber and other materials have moved up appreciably, and shortages of other construction inputs— such as labor and lots ready for development— remain acute. . . . amid surging demand for housing . . . Demand for housing surged earlier during the pandemic and has remained strong, with home sales well above levels seen in the years before the pandemic despite very tight inventory of homes available for sale. This surge in demand is likely due to a combination of factors, including increased work-from-home arrangements; shifts away from other types of consumer spending, such as travel and leisure; and mortgage rates that remain low despite notable recent increases. Meanwhile, mortgage credit remained broadly available for a wide range of potential borrowers. Although mortgage credit for borrowers with low credit scores remained tighter than before the pandemic, it eased over the second half of last year. . . . which has contributed to record house price growth As a result of supply constraints and surging demand, house price growth reached record levels, and, even after adjusting for overall inflation, home prices have surpassed their peak of the mid-2000s. According to data from Zillow, national house prices rose almost 20 percent last year. Moreover, strong house price growth has been widespread across the United States, as nearly 80 percent of metropolitan areas experienced annual house price increases of at least 10 percent. Homebuying sentiment, as measured by the Michigan survey, remains depressed, reflecting the low inventory of homes and high prices. Business investment slowed in response to supply constraints . . . Investment in equipment and intangibles grew at an annual rate of just 4 percent in the second half of last year, a marked step-down from the nearly 14 percent pace in the first half. As with other sectors of the economy, investment demand has remained strong, while supply constraints have limited spending, as evidenced by shipments of capital goods increasingly lagging orders and equipment prices rising sharply. Supply bottlenecks in the motor vehicle sector have been particularly acute, and business spending on vehicles declined appreciably in the second half of 2021. Investment in nonresidential structures declined further last year despite a sharp rebound in oil drilling and remains well below pre-pandemic levels. This sector typically lags in recoveries, and shortages of building materials may be further restraining activity. . . . while financing conditions remain accommodative Corporate financing conditions through capital markets remained broadly accommodative for nonfinancial firms and continued to be supported by corporate bond yields that remain very low by historical standards. Amid these low yields and ample investor demand, gross issuance of corporate bonds continued at a robust pace, albeit down from the exceptional pace seen in 2020. In contrast, bank lending to businesses was, on net, subdued last year. While commercial real estate loans grew at a modest pace similar to the years just before the pandemic, commercial and industrial loan balances contracted as a result of loan forgiveness associated with the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), elevated paydowns, and generally weak borrower demand. Meanwhile, financing conditions for small businesses have improved notably over the past year and have generally been stable in recent months. Lending standards have eased, and loan origination volumes are in line with prepandemic levels, though loan demand remains weak for the smallest firms. Moreover, default and delinquency rates are now within their prepandemic range. Nevertheless, the pandemic continues to negatively affect the operations of small businesses, especially in the most affected industries (accommodation and food services, arts, entertainment, and recreation). The strong U.S. demand has partly been met through a rapid rise in imports Driven by the strength in U.S. economic activity, particularly the strong demand for goods and a desire to restock inventories, U.S. imports have continued to increase at a notable pace. High levels of imported goods have kept international logistics channels operating under high pressure, which has continued to impair the timely delivery of goods to U.S. customers. By contrast, U.S. exports increased modestly over the second half of 2021 and remain below pre-pandemic levels. Given the relative strength in imports compared with exports, both the nominal trade deficit and the current account deficit have increased as a share of GDP relative to 2019. Federal fiscal actions provided a diminishing degree of support to economic activity . . . In response to the pandemic, the federal government enacted a historic set of fiscal policies to ameliorate hardship caused by the viral outbreak and support the economic recovery. Policies such as stimulus checks, supplemental unemployment insurance, and child tax credit payments have aided households; grants-in-aid have supported state and local governments; and business support programs such as the PPP have helped sustain firms. Although these temporary policies continue to support the level of GDP, they have begun to unwind and are now likely imposing a drag on GDP growth as the effects on spending wane over time. In addition to pandemic-support policies, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act will gradually boost spending on infrastructure over the next 10 years and is only partially offset by new revenues and other spending reductions. . . . while significantly raising the budget deficit and federal debt Overall, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that fiscal policies enacted since the start of the pandemic—including the infrastructure bill—will increase federal deficits by roughly $5.4 trillion by the end of fiscal year 2030, with the largest deficit effects in fiscal 2020 and 2021.8 These policies, combined with the effects of automatic stabilizers—the reduction in tax receipts and increase in transfers that occur as a consequence of depressed economic activity— caused the federal deficit to surge to 15 percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2020 and remain elevated at 12½ percent in fiscal 2021. But with fiscal support fading, the deficit is expected to fall sharply this year to a level closer to that observed in the years just before the pandemic. As a result of the unprecedented fiscal support over the past two years, federal debt held by the public jumped to around 100 percent of nominal GDP in 2020—the highest debtto-GDP ratio since 1947—and remained at a similar level in 2021. Nevertheless, net interest outlays—primarily reflecting debt service payments—have remained relatively flat over the past two years due to historically low interest rates on government borrowing. State and local government finances have been bolstered by federal aid and strong growth in tax revenue . . . Federal policymakers have provided a historic level of fiscal support to state and local governments, with aid totaling nearly $1 trillion—more than covering pandemicrelated budget shortfalls in the aggregate. Moreover, following the pandemic-induced slump, total state tax collections rose smartly in 2021, pushed up by the economic expansion. At the local level, property taxes have continued to rise apace, and the typically long lags between changes in the market value of real estate and changes in taxable assessments suggest that property tax revenues will continue to rise going forward, given the rise in house prices. Meanwhile, conditions in municipal bond markets remained accommodative: Yields stayed near historical lows, and issuance continued at a solid pace, on par with pre-pandemic issuance. . . . but hiring and construction outlays continued to lag Despite the return to in-person schooling this year and the strong fiscal position of state and local governments, employment levels have regained only about one-half of their sizable pandemic losses, with the shortfall concentrated in public education. One reason appears to be that public-sector wages have not kept pace with the rapid gains in the private sector, which is likely inhibiting the ability of these governments to staff back up to pre-pandemic levels. Meanwhile, real construction outlays by state and local governments appear to have declined significantly in 2021, and real infrastructure spending by these governments is currently about 10 percent below pre-pandemic levels. Financial Developments The path of the federal funds rate expected to prevail over the next few years steepened notably The market-based expected path of the federal funds rate steepened notably amid news about the labor market recovery, rising inflation pressures, and the accompanying prospect of tighter monetary policy. Market-based measures suggest that investors anticipate the federal funds rate will soon begin to rise and move above 1 percent in the middle of this year, about two and a half years earlier than expected in July.  Similarly, according to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in January, the median respondent views the target range as most likely to increase later in the current quarter, about one and a half years earlier than in the June surveys. Treasury yields increased substantially across maturities . . . Yields on nominal Treasury securities across maturities have risen notably since early July, with much of the increase having occurred in the past couple of months as the anticipation for an imminent start to the removal of monetary accommodation has firmed. Uncertainty about longer-terminterest rates—as measured by the implied volatility embedded in the prices of near-term swap options on 10-year swap interest rates— also increased markedly, reportedly reflecting an increase in uncertainty about inflation and the policy outlook. . . . while spreads of other long-term debt to Treasury securities widened moderately Across credit categories, corporate bond yields have risen substantially, and their spreads over yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities have widened moderately since early July (figure 33). Still, both yields and spreads remain near the bottom of their historical distributions, and corporate credit quality is generally healthy and stable. News about the spread of new coronavirus variants appeared to have only limited and temporary effects on corporate bond spreads. Since early July, yields on 30-year agency mortgage-backed securities—an important pricing factor for home mortgage rates— increased, and spreads over comparablematurity Treasury securities widened moderately but stayed near the low end of their historical range. Municipal bond yields moved higher, and spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened to levels close to their historical medians. Broad equity price indexes declined slightly on net Broad indexes of equity prices decreased a little, on net, since early July. Recent declines amid expectations of an earlier beginning to the removal of policy accommodation have offset previous gains, which were supported by strong corporate earnings that had seemed resilient to pandemic developments. Stocks of small-capitalization firms underperformed notably, as the likelihood for a tighter stance of monetary policy has increased. Bank stock prices rose, on net, buoyed by an improved economic outlook and expectations of higher levels of interest rates and net interest margins in the future. Measures of volatility for the S&P 500 index, both an option-implied metric (the VIX) and a comparable forward-looking measure based on realized volatility, increased somewhat amid evolving monetary policy expectations and concerns over the Omicron variant and stand above their respective historical medians. Markets for Treasury securities, mortgagebacked securities, and corporate and municipal bonds functioned well . . . Markets for Treasury securities and mortgagebacked securities functioned smoothly since July even as some measures of liquidity conditions for Treasury securities deteriorated moderately, which reflected increased yield volatility due, in part, to uncertainty about the path of monetary policy. Measures of market functioning in corporate and municipal bond markets indicated liquid and stable trading conditions. Bid-ask spreads for corporate bonds across credit ratings currently stand below pre-pandemic levels and near the bottom of their historical distributions. . . . while short-term funding market conditions remained stable Short-term funding markets continued to function smoothly. The effective federal funds rate and other overnight unsecured rates declined slightly relative to the interest rate on reserve balances since early July. Secured overnight rates remained stable, with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate steady at the offering rate on the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility on most days since early July. Ample liquidity and a limited supply of Treasury bills kept shortterm interest rates low and led to increased usage of the ON RRP facility. Bank credit expanded and bank profitability remained strong Total loans and leases outstanding at commercial banks expanded significantly in the second half of last year, driven by continued solid growth in commercial real estate, residential real estate, and consumer loans, which outweighed declines in commercial and industrial loans. In both October and January, the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, conducted by the Federal Reserve, reported easier standards for most loan categories over the second half of 2021.11 In the January survey, respondents generally anticipated a further easing of lending standards and stronger loan demand over the current year. Bank profitability remained strong, declining slightly over the second half of last year but remaining at pre-pandemic levels, helped by the continued release of loan loss reserves, given solid credit quality indicators. Delinquency rates on bank loans remained low relative to historical averages throughout the second half of 2021. International Developments The recovery abroad continued in the second half of the year . . . Economic activity abroad continued to recover briskly in the second half of last year, as a noticeable pickup in vaccinations and greater adaptability allowed many foreign economies to further reopen. Unemployment rates in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) have now generally returned to levels near those that prevailed before the pandemic. That said, the emergence of the Delta variant of the virus last summer slowed the recovery of some economies, especially in Asia, and resulted in factory and port closures, which, in turn, exacerbated supply bottlenecks.More recently, the Omicron outbreak has been a headwind and a risk, especially for countries with lower vaccination rates; and order backlogs in industries such as automobile manufacturing remain high. Still, production bottlenecks in Asia have started to unwind. . . . and foreign inflation increased significantly in most economies As in the United States, foreign inflation has picked up noticeably since late 2020. This higher inflation has been mostly driven by soaring prices for energy and food, which, combined, account for well over half of the level of inflation abroad. Higher prices for core goods have also contributed to the rise of inflation, but core inflation abroad has risen less than in the United States, in part because demand for durable goods in foreign economies appears to have increased relatively less sharply. Many foreign central banks are tightening monetary policy or have signaled a future shift in stance In light of elevated inflation, many policymakers are moving to reduce the significant monetary stimulus undertaken since the start of the pandemic. Several emerging market central banks, including those of Brazil, Korea, and Mexico, have already raised their policy rates because of concerns over the persistence of inflationary pressures. In AFEs, a few central banks, including those of New Zealand, Norway, and the United Kingdom, have started raising their policy rates, and the Bank of Canada has signaled its intention to raise its policy rate soon. Others have taken steps to normalize their balance sheet policies: The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and the Reserve Bank of Australia have ceased net asset purchases, and the European Central Bank plans to reduce its asset purchases this year. In contrast, the Bank of Japan has communicated that it is not in a rush to tighten policy, noting that measures of underlying inflation in Japan remain below its 2 percent target. Foreign financial conditions tightened some but remain accommodative . . . Expectations for faster removal of monetary policy accommodation, amid higher inflation and easing concerns about the pandemic, led to notable increases in sovereign yields in several AFEs. Despite expectations for tighter monetary policy, the strength in corporate earnings and reduced concerns about the pandemic have supported AFE equities, which are little changed, on net, since mid-2021. The change in financial conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs) has been relatively muted despite the shift in advanced-economy monetary policy expectations and increased geopolitical tensions. Net inflows to EMEdedicated funds stepped down and hovered around zero, in contrast with notable outflows during the 2013–14 period, and EME sovereign spreads widened only somewhat. In China, solvency problems in the real estate sector and regulatory uncertainty appeared to weigh on stock prices of large Chinese firms listed in Hong Kong, with the Hang Seng Index decreasing notably. Brazilian equity prices also decreased amid political uncertainty, while some other EME stock indexes registered moderate gains. More recently, geopolitical tensions surrounding Russia and Ukraine have led to the underperformance of Eastern European equity indexes.. . . and the dollar appreciated moderately on net The broad dollar index—a measure of the trade-weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies—has risen modestly since mid-2021. The dollar appreciated against Latin American currencies amid increased political uncertainty in some countries, while it was mixed against Asian EME currencies. The dollar appreciated against many AFE currencies, in part reflecting the more notable increase in the U.S. near-term yields compared with the AFE counterparts.Part 2 Monetary PolicyThe Federal Open Market Committee has maintained the federal funds rate near zero . . . The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been providing forward guidance for the target range for the federal funds rate, indicating that the range would be maintained at 0 to ¼ percent until specific employment and inflation criteria had been met. Consistent with that guidance, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. In December, the Committee concluded that the inflation criteria in the forward guidance had been met and the target range would be maintained until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment. In January, the Committee stated that, with inflation well above 2 percent and a strong labor market, it expected it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. . . . and the Committee has gradually reduced the monthly pace of its net asset purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, which will end in early March From June 2020 until November 2021, the Federal Reserve had been expanding its holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion per month. At its November meeting, in light of the substantial further progress the economy had made toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee decided to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion per month for Treasury securities and by $5 billion per month for agency MBS. At its December meeting, in light of inflation developments and the further improvement in the labor market, the Committee began to reduce the monthly pace of net purchases more rapidly, by $20 billion per month for Treasury securities and by $10 billion per month for agency MBS. At its January meeting, the Committee decided to continue to reduce the monthly pace of net purchases and conclude net purchases in early March. The FOMC will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook The Committee will continue to monitor incoming economic data and would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate to manage risks that could impede the attainment of its goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. With appropriate policy, inflation is expected to decline over the course of the year as supply constraints ease and demand moderates due to waning effects of fiscal support and the removal of monetary policy accommodation. The FOMC will use its policy tools as appropriate to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched while promoting a sustainable expansion and strong labor market. The Federal Reserve issued a statement regarding principles for reducing the size of its balance sheet Following the conclusion of its January meeting, the FOMC issued a set of principles regarding its planned approach for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. With these principles, the Committee reiterated its view that changes in the target range for the federal funds rate are its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy and conveyed its expectation that reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would occur after the process of increasing the target range for the federal funds rate had begun. The Committee also noted that it would determine the timing and pace of reductions in the size of its balance sheet so as to promote its maximumemployment and price-stability goals and that reductions would occur over time in a predictable manner, primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA). Furthermore, the FOMC communicated that, over time, it intended to maintain securities holdings in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample reserves regime. The Committee also noted that, in the longer run, it intended to hold primarily Treasury securities in the SOMA, thereby minimizing the effect of Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. Finally, the Committee emphasized that it was prepared to adjust any details of its approach in light of economic and financial developments. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued to grow, although at a diminished pace since November The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has grown to $8.9 trillion from $8.1 trillion in July, reflecting continued net asset purchases of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgagebacked securities to support smooth market functioning and foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. All of the Federal Reserve’s emergency credit and liquidity facilities have been closed for new lending for some time, and the residual outstanding balances at those facilities have continued to decline. Reserve balances have changed little, on net, since July and stand near $4 trillion. Usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility increased significantly. The Federal Reserve established two standing repurchase agreement facilities In July of last year, the Federal Reserve established a domestic standing repurchase agreement (repo) facility and a standing repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities. These facilities are intended to serve as backstops in money markets to support the effective implementation of monetary policy and smooth market functioning. The rates for these facilities have been maintained at levels somewhat higher than rates in overnight funding markets, consistent with their intended roles as backstops.Part 3 Summary of Economic ProjectionsThe following material was released after the conclusion of the December 14–15, 2021, meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on December 14–15, 2021, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 to 2024 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longerrun projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability.The Limited Recovery of Labor SupplyAlthough labor demand has bounced back strongly over the past year, labor supply has been much slower to rebound, resulting in an extremely tight labor market. In particular, the labor force participation rate (LFPR)—the share of working-age adults either employed or actively seeking work—fell early in the pandemic and changed little last year despite plentiful job openings and rapidly rising wages. The behavior of the LFPR reflects a combination of factors that have limited the recovery of labor supply following the pandemic. The most important of these factors are listed in turn. Retirements: The retired share of the population is now substantially higher than before the pandemic, accounting for more than two-thirds of the net decline in the LFPR. About half (0.6 percentage point) of this increase was to be expected even in the absence of the pandemic, as additional members of the large babyboom generation have reached retirement age in the past two years. The other half of the increase comes from excess retirements, above and beyond what would have been expected in the absence of the pandemic, due to individuals “pulling forward” their planned future retirements by a couple of years. The effect of this factor is likely to dwindle as the date when these individuals had previously planned to retire is reached, provided that younger cohorts continue to retire at expected rates. Caregiving: Many individuals who have left the labor force have taken on caregiving responsibilities during the pandemic, accounting for an additional 0.4 percentage point of the LFPR shortfall as of December 2021.4 Caregiving responsibilities among parents of school-aged children exerted a large drag on labor supply in 2020, when schools were largely closed. This drag on labor supply eased over the course of 2021 as schools reopened, although the ongoing pandemic may leave parents unsure whether in-person schooling could be disrupted again. Other caregiving responsibilities (for example, elder care) remain a drag on labor supply, accounting for nearly all of the negative contribution of this category to the LFPR. Additional factors: Labor supply has also been held back by other short-term factors related to the pandemic, including fear of contracting the virus and— especially during the Omicron wave—high numbers of quarantining workers. As of early January 2022, nearly3 percent of out-of-work adults reported fear of contracting or spreading the virus as their main reason for being out of work; the rate is even higher among individuals with no college education, who are more likely to work in contact-intensive sectors when employed. This factor may exacerbate other labor supply factors, as retirees or caregivers may be especially fearful of contracting or spreading the virus. Additionally, many households built up larger-thannormal savings during the pandemic, which may have enabled workers to retire, spend time on caregiving, or remain out of the labor force until virus conditions subside. Finally, reduced immigration likely has held back total labor supply, even though the effect on the LFPR is likely to be much smaller.Differences in Wage and Employment Growth across Jobs and WorkersWages have increased strongly during the past year, especially for workers in lower-paying jobs and industries. For example, figure A shows that compensation growth for leisure and hospitality jobs as measured by the employment cost index was stronger than for goods-producing and service-producing industries overall in the second half of 2021. The leisure and hospitality industry was substantially affected by social distancing earlier in the pandemic, leading to outsized employment losses relative to other industries and a much weaker recovery. However, job openings for this industry are very high, which, in combination with strong wage growth, indicates that the comparatively weak employment rebound in leisure and hospitality now largely reflects a lack of available workers.The industry-specific effects of the pandemic are also apparent in the patterns of employment and wages for lower-paying jobs relative to higher-paying jobs. As shown in figure B, job losses initially aligned closely with workers’ level of earnings, with the lowest-wage jobs (which are disproportionately found in serviceproducing industries) experiencing the greatest employment declines. As the economy has reopened, lower-wage employment has rebounded more. Consistent with the rebound in labor demand for these jobs coupled with hiring difficulties, figure C shows that wage growth has been especially strong for lowerwage jobs.Finally, figure D illustrates how wages have evolved across racial and ethnic groups over the course of the pandemic. In 2019, median hourly wages were around $1 higher for Asian and white workers relative to Black and Hispanic workers. From 2019 to 2021, median wages increased between $1.10 and $1.90 for all groups, leaving the disparities in wage levels across these groups little changed relative to 2019.How Widespread Has the Rise in Inflation Been?Consumer price inflation increased markedly in 2021, with the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rising 5.8 percent over the 12 months through December, following a subdued increase of 1.3 percent in 2020. In the first half of last year, the increase in inflation was driven by a fairly small number of categories. In contrast, over the second half of the year, relatively high price increases became more widespread, suggesting that broader-based inflationary pressures had taken hold. This discussion reviews how inflation evolved across a comprehensive set of product categories last year to help shed light on the forces generating higher inflation. Although price increases driven by bottlenecks and production constraints have been more concentrated in a relatively small set of product categories that have been particularly affected by these supply–demand imbalances, labor shortages, rising wages, and other broad-based cost pressures likely contributed to a pickup in inflation across a wide range of goods and services. Figure A divides PCE into 146 product categories and presents the share of those categories for which prices were increasing by over 3 percent. This share was stable at around 35 percent between 2016 and 2019—close to the average share observed since the mid-1990s—and continued to be stable in 2020. However, the share of products with more than 3 percent inflation increased last year to above 60 percent. And, as is evident from the black line, the share of categories with price increases of more than 3 percent (annual rate) over a three-month window increased gradually over the course of the year. As shown by the left panel, the share of product categories with inflation above 3 percent temporarily reached a similar level on two other occasions since the 1990s (in 2001 and 2007), but this share is still notably lower than that in the high-inflation regime of the 1970s. As seen in figure B, which reports the shares of product categories with 12-month price changes above 3 percent separately for goods and services, the increase in the breadth of large price increases was especially unusual for goods. yet the share of higher inflation in services has also been moving up in the past few months, likely in part because of mounting inflation pressures from the labor market.While robust price increases became more prevalent across product categories in the past year, the size of price increases still varied significantly across product categories. To better understand the drivers of the high aggregate inflation last year, figure C presents the fulldistribution of price changes for different products and further emphasizes the different roles being played by prices of goods versus services in explaining changes in this distribution compared with the 2016–19 period. In figure C, the blue line depicts the distribution of annualized monthly price changes observed from 2016 to 2019, while the black line depicts the distribution in 2021. In both periods, this distribution is very wide, reflecting the sizable heterogeneity in price behavior across items. The higher and broader inflation during 2021 is reflected in the chart as a rightward shift in the distribution of price changes relative to the 2016–19 period.Four aspects of the change in the distribution are worth noting: (1) fewer items with price decreases, which are depicted in the blue shaded areas below zero on the horizontal axis (2) a notable decline in the occurrence of price increases of between 1 and 4 percent, shown by the blue shaded area in the middle of the distribution (3) more items with inflation between 5 and 12 percent as well as slightly more with inflation between 13 and 24 percent, shown in the gray shaded area in those ranges on the horizontal axis (4) a striking 6 percentage point increase at the very top of the distribution, indicated by the large (gray shaded) spike in the share of items with price increases of at least 25 percent These features of the distribution of price changes can be better understood by considering the contributions of goods and services to the changes. First, the left panel of figure D shows the contribution of goods to the total price change distribution between 2016 and 2019 (the blue line) and 2021 (the black line). Goods account for about 4 percentage points of the 6 percentage point increase in the spike at the top of the price change distribution in figure C as well as nearly all of the rightward shift in the price change distribution in excess of 12 percent inflation. Moreover, the increased occurrence of high inflation for goods is a stark departure from small positive or slightly negative price changes between 2016 and 2019. These observations are consistent with the very large price increases in goods categories such as motor vehicles and other categories disrupted by supply constraints against the backdrop of strong demand as consumption shifted away from services during the pandemic. Second, the right panel of figure D shows the contribution of services to the total price change distribution. Services account for the vast majority of the shift from the middle of the distribution of price changes (the blue shaded area) to inflation between 5 and 12 percent (the gray shaded area), while they account for less than one-third of the increase in the spike at the top of the distribution. In summary, the share of products experiencing notable price increases moved appreciably higher in 2021, with the broadening due to both goods and services prices. That said, most of last year’s very high inflation readings were concentrated in goods—a reflection of strong demand in the face of supply bottlenecks that have particularly affected these items. Finally, although currently more widespread than in recent history, large price increases were considerably less widespread than was seen during the high-inflation regime of the 1970s. In the period ahead, the large price changes in goods may ease once supply chain disruptions finally resolve, but, if labor shortages continue and wages rise faster than productivity in a broad-based way, inflation pressures may persist and continue to broaden out.Supply Chain Bottlenecks in U.S. Manufacturing and TradeOver the past year, global transportation and distribution networks have been overwhelmed, and manufacturers have struggled to find the materials and labor needed to meet demand for their products. Demand for goods has been notably boosted, as ongoing concerns about COvID-19 have led consumers and businesses to shift spending away from services, such as travel, in favor of goods, such as those related to increased time at home. While some distribution and production bottlenecks showed signs of improvement toward the end of last year, other bottlenecks are expected to remain for some time. The surge in demand for imports has strained shipping networks worldwide, and U.S. ports have been particularly congested. About one-third of all U.S. goods imports (by value) arrive via seaborne containers, and, consistent with the strength in imports of consumer and capital goods in 2021, the number of containers processed at domestic ports last year was significantly higher than in any previous year.The combined ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach have faced substantial congestion, with the number of ships waiting for a berth recently reaching an all-time high. Elevated levels of port congestion in the United States and abroad have caused on-time arrivals of global shipping vessels to plunge and have resulted in dramatic increases in charter rates for container ships. Moreover, once goods arrive in port, major bottlenecks in U.S. trucking and rail transportation have further delayed their movement. Trucking cargo rates have risen sharply since mid-2020, and some measures are now more than 15 percent above the levels prevailing in 2019.Distribution problems have also weighed heavily on domestic production. In 2021, a record number of manufacturers reported that an insufficient supply of materials was one reason they were unable to produce at full capacity. Together with increasingly strong demand for goods, these limitations on production led to backlogs of orders and to supplier delivery times well above historical norms. With supply unable to satisfy demand, prices for a wide range of goods increased last year, sometimes sharply. Indeed, the producer price index for overall manufacturing was more than 15 percent higher in the fourth quarter of 2021 than its year-earlier level. Domestic production has been further hampered by manufacturers’ inability to hire and retain skilled labor. Despite adding about 350,000 workers in 2021, by the end of the year manufacturing employment was still about 250,000 below where it was just before the pandemic. Although manufacturers have long noted difficulties in finding workers, labor market conditions were particularly tight in 2021. At the end of the year, factory workers were quitting their jobs at near-record rates, and manufacturing plants had listed approximately 850,000 job openings—about twice as many openings as in the 2017–19 period. The motor vehicle sector has faced a particularly acute and well-publicized shortage of semiconductor chips, reflecting a combination of factors. On the demand side, consumers’ appetite for cars and trucks has remained remarkably strong, and the chip content per vehicle has increased.2 Meanwhile, the supply of semiconductors was disrupted by COVIDinduced shutdowns in foreign countries—such as Malaysia and Vietnam—that are major players in the semiconductor supply chain. Even when enough of certain types of chips have been available, an undersupply of complementary chips has, at times, created problems for manufacturers. These chip shortages have led to widespread shutdowns and production slowdowns at U.S. motor vehicle assembly plants. Without an ample supply of new vehicles, many dealerships sold off remaining inventories and raised prices. The lean inventories and high prices weighed heavily on vehicle sales for much of 2021. Recently, however, semiconductor shortages have begun to ease somewhat, as indicated by an increase in U.S. vehicle production. Nevertheless, these shortages have persisted, and statements by some auto industry executives suggest that they expect production bottlenecks to continue well into this year. Outside the auto sector, supply chain bottlenecks show some signs of improvement. Capacity expansion at some ports in late 2021 and waning seasonal demand likely contributed to recent declines in the cost of shipping. Additionally, inland rail hubs have decongested somewhat, facilitating the fl ow of containers inland. Also, late last year, domestic manufacturers saw slower increases in the price of inputs, improving delivery times, and fewer items in short supply than they had earlier. A few commodities have experienced a notable increase in availability. One example is steel, for which delivery times and prices have fallen sharply after having been elevated for much of last year.Developments Related to Financial StabilityThis discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the financial sector, and funding risks. Although some asset valuations are elevated, measures of household and business leverage have declined, and the banking system has shown considerable resilience since the onset of the pandemic. Structural vulnerabilities in other parts of the financial system are still being addressed, including those related to various types of investment funds and vulnerabilities in Treasury market functioning. Prices of risky assets remain elevated, supported in part by a low interest rate environment and low term premiums on Treasury securities. One common measure of equity valuations, the ratio of equity prices to forecast earnings, remains high compared with historical values. Spreads on corporate bonds and leveraged loans continue to be low. Price indexes for a range of commercial real estate sectors are at or near historical highs, and vacancy rates have declined. Residential home prices have continued to rise, with nearly 80 percent of metropolitan statistical areas seeing double-digit annual growth rates during 2021. Nonfinancial-sector leverage has broadly declined. The rapid growth of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) has brought the ratio of nominal credit to nominal GDP, which measures the aggregate debt owed by the private nonfinancial sector relative to the size of the economy, down to near its prepandemic levels. Household debt relative to nominal GDP remains firmly below its longrun trend, and household credit growth has been driven almost exclusively by prime-rated borrowers. Homeowner equity is high, and mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates are below their pre-pandemic levels despite the end of pandemic-related relief and forbearance programs. Because of high corporate cash holdings, aggregate net nonfinancial business leverage sits at its lowest level since 2014. Fueled by strong earnings and low borrowing costs, most businesses saw a sharp increase in their ability to service their debt burdens, with the interest coverage ratio (the ratio of earnings to interest expenses) for the median fi rm solidly above pre-pandemic levels and near historical highs. However, for fi rms in industries hit hardest by the pandemic, including airlines, hotels, and restaurants, leverage remains elevated and interest coverage ratios are lower. vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage are well within their historical range. Risk-based capital ratios at domestic bank holding companies reached a 20-year high during the first quarter of 2021. These capital ratios declined modestly over the rest of the year as banks increased their share repurchases and dividend payouts amid an improved economic outlook and the Federal Reserve’s lifting of restrictions on capital distributions. Throughout 2021, robust economic growth and strong capital markets contributed to high bank profitability, which fosters resilience through greater loss absorption capacity and an ability to retain earnings to raise capital if needed. In contrast, leverage at certain nonbank financial institutions, including life insurers and hedge funds, has remained near historical highs. Data limitations and the complexity of hedge fund strategies can obscure the true nature of leverage in that sector. However, one common measure of hedge fund leverage, the ratio of gross notional exposures to equity capital, is near its peak since data became available in 2012.Funding markets remain relatively stable. Domestic banks continue to maintain significant levels of highquality liquid assets. Assets under management at prime and tax-exempt money market funds (MMFs), which experienced significant outflows during the March 2020 turmoil, continued to decline, on net, since mid-2021, while those at government MMFs remained near historical highs. In December 2021, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) proposed reforms to MMFs intended to mitigate the financial stability risks they pose, including the adoption of swing pricing for certain fund types, increased liquidity requirements, and other measures meant to make them more resilient to redemptions.  The market for digital assets, including stablecoins, has grown rapidly. The market value of stablecoins exceeded $150 billion as of January 2022. As detailed in a November 2021 report released by the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, some stablecoins are partially backed by assets that may lose value or become illiquid, making them susceptible to runs. Prefunded resources at central counterparties (CCPs) are high, particularly relative to current market volatility, reducing the likelihood of margin shortfalls and liquidity strains if volatility increases. Nevertheless, increased retail trading has exposed new challenges for the risk-management frameworks of the CCPs that clear equities and equity options. Financial institutions with significant holdings of long-term fixed-rate debt instruments (for example, Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), corporate bonds, and mortgage loans), such as banks and mutual funds, may recognize revaluation losses if long-term interest rates increase further, though some of those losses could be offset by higher interest income. Treasury Market Resilience In November 2021, the Interagency Working Group composed of staff from the Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, SEC, and Commodity Futures Trading Commission released a report detailing ongoing vulnerabilities in the U.S. Treasury market and principles to promote a wellfunctioning Treasury market. The report also outlined multiple ongoing workstreams designed to further enhance the group’s understanding of Treasury market vulnerabilities and to consider policy options that may further strengthen the market. LIBOR Transition The shift away from the widely used U.S. dollar (USD) LIBOR reference rates stepped up notably in recent months, in line with regulatory guidance to end most new use of USD LIBOR by December 31, 2021, and well ahead of the cessation of those rates on June 30, 2023. The transition away from USD LIBOR has largely been completed in floating-rate debt markets, where nearly 90 percent of new issuance now references the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR). In securitization markets, the governmentsponsored enterprises had stopped accepting LIBOR adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) in 2020, are now accepting only SOFR ARMs, and have tied all of their associated MBS issuance to SOFR. Interest rate swap markets saw increases in volumes for SOFR-based trades in the second half of 2021, and this pace accelerated rapidly in January such that SOFR-based swaps trading now accounts for the majority of risk traded in this market, indicating widespread awareness and adoption of risk-free reference rates. Eurodollar futures have lagged the swap market, although volumes for SOFR-based futures contracts are increasing there also. The transition in business lending has been slower, although recent data suggest that the use of USD LIBOR as a reference rate for business loans has fallen sharply since the start of the year and that the pace of SOFR adoption is accelerating.Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money MarketsThe size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from $4.2 trillion before the pandemic to its current level of roughly $8.9 trillion, largely reflecting an increase in System Open Market Account holdings from asset purchases. As net asset purchases have continued, albeit at a slower pace in recent months, the Federal Reserve’s liabilities have also increased. This discussion reviews recent developments in the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and conditions in money markets. The Federal Reserve’s net asset purchases continued at a pace of $120 billion per month from July through October. At its November meeting—in light of the substantial further progress the economy had made toward the Federal Open Market Committee’s goals since December 2020—the Committee decided to begin reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion per month for Treasury securities and $5 billion per month for agency mortgage-backed securities. At its December meeting—in light of inflation developments and further improvement in the labor market—the Committee decided to double the pace of reductions in its net asset purchases, implying that increases in securities holdings would cease by mid-March. The Federal Reserve’s net asset purchases since July 2021 have led to an $813 billion increase in its total assets. Federal Reserve liabilities increased in line with changes in its assets. The level of reserve balances was little changed, on net, while other liabilities—most Reserve liability—balances maintained in the Treasury General Account (TGA)—varied significantly over recent months in connection with developments related to the debt limit. The U.S. Treasury lowered its outstanding balance in the TGA from $725 billion in the beginning of July 2021 to a low of $42 billion on December 16, 2021. Following the debt limit resolution on December 16, 2021, which raised the debt limit of the U.S. government, both net Treasury bill issuance and the TGA balance increased to more normal levels. Money markets continued to function smoothly amid these developments, with ample liquidity putting broad downward pressure on short-term interest rates. In addition, the limited supply of Treasury bills during the debt limit episode pushed bill yields lower. In this environment of ample liquidity, limited Treasury bill supply, and low repurchase agreement rates, the ON RRP facility continued to serve its intended purpose of helping to provide a fl oor under short-term interest rates and support effective implementation of monetary policy. Usage of the facility has nearly doubled, on average, since early July, primarily driven by greater participation from government money market funds. The ON RRP take-up reached a record high of $1.9 trillion on year-end before retracing to around $1.6 trillion in early January.Forecast UncertaintyThe economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.3 to 3.7 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the third year, and 0.7 to 5.3 percent in the fourth year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the third year, and 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those figures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of shortterm interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-ofyear basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years.
Summary In the first part of the year, inflation remained well above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run objective of 2 percent, with some inflation measures rising to their highest levels in more than 40 years. These price pressures reflect supply and demand imbalances, higher energy and food prices, and broader price pressures, including those resulting from an extremely tight labor market. In the labor market, demand has remained strong, and supply has increased only modestly. As a result, the unemployment rate fell noticeably below the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level, and nominal wages continued to rise rapidly. Although overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter, household spending and business fixed investment remained strong. The most recent indicators suggest that private fixed investment may be moderating, but consumer spending remains strong. In response to sustained inflationary pressures and a strong labor market, the FOMC has been adjusting its policies and communications since last fall. At its March meeting, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate off the effective lower bound to ¼ to ½ percent. The Committee continued to raise the target range in May and June, bringing it to 1½ to 1¾ percent following the June meeting, and indicated that ongoing increases are likely to be appropriate. The Committee ceased net asset purchases in early March and began reducing its securities holdings in June. The Committee is acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials. The Committee’s commitment to restoring price stability— which is necessary for sustaining a strong labor market—is unconditional. Recent Economic and Financial Developments Inflation. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), rose from 5.8 percent in December 2021 to 6.3 percent in April, its highest level since the early 1980s and well above the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent. This increase was driven by an acceleration of retail food and energy prices, reflecting further increases in commodity prices due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The 12-month measure of inflation that excludes the volatile food and energy categories (so-called core inflation) rose initially and then fell back to 4.9 percent in April, unchanged from last December. Three-month measures of core inflation have softened since December but remain far above levels consistent with price stability. Measures of near-term inflation expectations continued to rise markedly, while longer-term expectations moved up by less. The labor market. Demand for labor continued to outstrip available supply across many parts of the economy, and nominal wages continued to increase at a robust pace. While labor demand remained very strong, labor supply increased only modestly. As a result, the labor market tightened further between December and May, with job gains averaging 488,000 per month and the unemployment rate falling from 3.9 percent to 3.6 percent—just above the bottom of its range over the past 50 years. Economic activity. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have surged at a 6.9 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2021 and then to have declined at a 1.5 percent annual rate in the first quarter. The large swings in growth rates reflected fluctuations in the volatile expenditure categories of net exports and inventory investment. Abstracting from these volatile components, growth in private domestic final demand (consumer spending plus residential and business fixed investment—a measure that tends to be more stable and better reflects the strength of overall economic activity) was strong in the first quarter, supported by some unwinding of supply bottlenecks and a further reopening of the economy. The most recent indicators suggest that private fixed investment may be moderating, but consumer spending remains strong. As a result, real GDP appears on track to rise moderately in the second quarter. Financial conditions. Financial conditions have tightened significantly this year. The expected path of the federal funds rate over the next few years shifted up substantially, and yields on nominal Treasury securities across maturities have risen considerably since late February amid sustained inflationary pressures and associated expectations for further monetary policy tightening. Equity prices were volatile and declined sharply, on net, while corporate bond yields increased substantially and spreads increased notably, partly reflecting some concerns about the future corporate credit outlook. Mortgage rates also rose sharply. In turn, tighter financial conditions may have begun to weigh on some financing activity. On the business side, nonfinancial corporate bond issuance was solid in the first quarter but slowed somewhat in April and May, with speculativegrade bond issuance being particularly weak. That said, the growth of bank loans to businesses picked up, and business credit quality has remained strong thus far. For households, mortgage originations declined materially. Nevertheless, mortgage credit remained broadly available for a wide range of potential borrowers. For other consumer loans (such as auto loans and credit cards), credit standards eased somewhat further or changed little, and credit outstanding grew briskly. Financial stability. Despite experiencing a series of adverse shocks—higher-thanexpected inflation, the ongoing supply disruptions related to COVID-19, and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine—the financial system has been resilient, though portions of the commodities markets temporarily experienced elevated levels of stress. The drop in equity prices and rising bond spreads suggest that valuation pressures in corporate securities markets have eased some from their previously elevated levels, but real estate prices have risen further this year. While business and household debt has been growing solidly, the ratio of credit to GDP has decreased to near pre-pandemic levels and most indicators of credit quality remained robust, suggesting that vulnerabilities from nonfinancial leverage are moderate. Large bank capital ratios dipped in the first quarter, but overall leverage in the financial sector appears moderate and little changed this year. Recent strains experienced in markets for stablecoins—digital assets that aim to maintain a stable value relative to a national currency or other reference assets— and other digital assets have highlighted the structural fragilities in that rapidly growing sector. A few signs of funding pressures emerged amid the geopolitical tensions, particularly in commodities markets. However, broad funding markets proved resilient, and with direct exposures of U.S. financial institutions to Russia and Ukraine being small, financial spillovers have been limited to date. International developments. Economic activity has continued to recover in many foreign economies, albeit with new significant headwinds from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and COVID lockdowns in China. These headwinds have, on net, pushed commodity prices higher, worsened supply disruptions, and lowered household and business confidence, thus damping the rebound in foreign economic activity. As in the United States, consumer price inflation abroad is high and has continued to rise in many economies, boosted by higher energy, food, and other commodity prices as well by supply chain constraints. In response, many foreign central banks have raised policy rates, and some have started to reduce the size of their balance sheets. Foreign financial conditions have tightened notably since the beginning of the year, in part reflecting the tightening in foreign monetary policy and concerns about persistently high inflation. Sovereign bond yields in many advanced foreign economies rose. Foreign risky asset prices declined, also driven by downside risks to the growth outlook amid the lockdowns in China and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The trade-weighted value of the dollar appreciated notably. Monetary Policy In response to significant ongoing inflation pressures and the tightening labor market, the Committee has been adjusting its policies and communications since last fall. The Committee wound down net purchases of securities and began reducing those securities holdings more rapidly than expected, and also initiated a swift increase in interest rates. Adjustments to both interest rates and the balance sheet are playing a role in firming the stance of monetary policy in support of the Committee’s maximumemployment and price-stability goals. Interest rate policy. In March, after holding the federal funds rate near zero since the onset of the pandemic, the FOMC raised the target range for that rate to ¼ to ½ percent. The Committee raised the target range again in May and June, bringing it to the current range of 1½ to 1¾ percent, and conveyed its anticipation that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. Balance sheet policy. The Federal Reserve began reducing its monthly net asset purchases last November and accelerated the reductions in December, bringing net purchases to an end in early March. In January, the FOMC issued a set of principles regarding its planned approach for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Consistent with those principles, the Committee announced in May its specific plans for significantly reducing its securities holdings and that these reductions would begin on June 1. The Committee acutely recognizes the significant hardship caused by elevated inflation, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials. The Committee is strongly committed to restoring price stability, which is necessary for sustaining a strong labor market. Special Topics Labor market disparities. The labor market recovery over the past year and a half has been robust and widespread as the labor market effects of the pandemic have eased, with particularly strong improvement among groups that had suffered the most. As a result, employment and earnings of nearly all major demographic groups are near or above their levels before the pandemic, and employment rates are again near multidecade highs. However, there remain notable differences in employment and earnings across groups that predate the pandemic. Developments in global supply chains. Supply chain bottlenecks remain a major impediment for domestic and foreign firms. While U.S. manufacturers have been recording solid output growth for more than a year, order backlogs and delivery times remain high, and producer prices have risen rapidly. Further risks to global supply chains abound. In China, COVID-19 lockdowns drove the largest monthly declines in industrial production there since early 2020 while also disrupting internal and international freight transportation. In addition, the war in Ukraine continues to put upward pressure on energy and food prices and has raised the risk of disruption in the supply of inputs to some manufacturing industries. Monetary policy rules. Simple monetary policy rules, which relate a policy interest rate to a small number of other economic variables, can provide useful guidance to policymakers. Many simple policy rules prescribed strongly negative values for the federal funds rate during the pandemic-driven recession. With inflation running well in excess of the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, a strong U.S. economy, and tight labor market conditions, the simple monetary policy rules considered here call for raising the target range for the federal funds rate significantly. Global inflation. Inflation abroad rose rapidly over the past year, reflecting soaring food and commodity prices, pandemic-related supply disruptions, and demand imbalances between goods and services. The price pressures have been amplified by the war in Ukraine and COVID-19 lockdowns in China. Although the recent inflation surge was concentrated in volatile components, such as food and energy, price increases have broadened to core goods and services. Global monetary policy. With inflation rising sharply across the globe, many central banks have tightened monetary policy. Policy tightening started last year as some emerging market central banks, particularly those in Latin America, were concerned that sharp increases in inflation could become entrenched in inflation expectations. Since fall 2021, many central banks in the advanced foreign economies have also started tightening monetary policy or are expected to do so soon, and several central banks that had expanded their balance sheets over the past two years are now allowing them to shrink. Developments in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Following the conclusion of net asset purchases, the balance sheet remained stable at around $9 trillion. Alongside the removal of policy accommodation—through actual and expected increases in the policy rate—plans for shrinking the size of the balance sheet were announced in May and were initiated in June. Despite the size of the balance sheet remaining steady, reserve balances fell, in large part because of increasingly elevated take-up at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, which reached a record high of $2.2 trillion. In an environment of ample liquidity, limited Treasury bill supply, and low repurchase agreement rates, the ON RRP facility continued to serve its intended purpose of helping to provide a floor under short-term interest rates and to support effective implementation of monetary policy.Part 1 Recent Economic and Financial DevelopmentsDomestic Developments Inflation continued to run high . . . After surging 5.8 percent over 2021—the largest increase since 1981—the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) continued to post notable increases so far this year, and the change over the 12 months ending in April stood at 6.3 percent (figure 1). This pace is well above the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. . . . reflecting further large increases in food and energy prices . . . Grocery prices increased at a very rapid pace of 10 percent over the 12 months ending in April, more than 4 percentage points faster than over the 12 months ending in December and the highest reading since 1981. Food commodity prices (such as wheat and corn), which had already increased last year, have risen further since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. At the same time, high fuel costs, supply chain bottlenecks, and high wage growth have also pushed up processing, packaging, and transportation costs for food. The PCE price index for energy increased 30 percent over the 12 months ending in April, about the same pace as over the 12 months ending in December. Large increases in crude oil and natural gas commodity prices have boosted consumer prices for gasoline and natural gas. . . . which, in turn, partly reflected rising prices of commodities and imports Because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, oil prices rose sharply in early March, reaching eight-year highs. Prices remain elevated and volatile, boosted by a European Union embargo of Russian oil imports but weighed down at times by concerns about global economic growth. In addition, producers in other countries are struggling to ramp up oil production. Nonfuel commodity prices also surged after the invasion, with large increases in the prices of both agricultural commodities and industrial metals. Although the price of industrial metals has declined recently, agricultural prices remain elevated. Ukraine and Russia are notable exporters of wheat, Russia is a major exporter of fertilizer, and higher energy prices are spilling over into the agricultural sector. Export restrictions and unfavorable weather conditions in several countries have also boosted agricultural prices. With commodity prices surging and foreign goods prices on the rise, import prices increased significantly. Excluding food and energy prices, monthly inflation readings have softened since the turn of the year but remain far above levels consistent with price stability Supply chain issues, hiring difficulties, and other capacity constraints have prevented the supply of products from rising quickly enough to satisfy continued strong demand, resulting in large price increases for many goods and services over the past year. After excluding consumer food and energy prices, the 12-month measure of core PCE inflation rose initially and then fell back to 4.9 percent in April, unchanged from December. That said, monthly core inflation readings have softened noticeably since the start of the year, with the three-month measure of core PCE inflation falling from an annual rate of 6.0 percent last December to 4.0 percent in April. In particular, inflation stepped down for durable goods, likely reflecting some easing in supply constraints. Nevertheless, the recent inflation readings have been mixed, remain far above levels consistent with price stability, and are far from conclusive evidence on the direction of inflation. Unlike durable goods price inflation, core services inflation has not declined significantly. Housing service prices continue to rise at a brisk pace, and increased demand for travel is markedly pushing up inflation rates for lodging and airfares. More generally, rapid growth of labor costs is putting upward pressure on the prices of all labor-intensive services. Measures of near-term inflation expectations continued to rise markedly, while longer-term expectations moved up by less The first half of 2022 saw further increases in expectations of inflation for the year ahead in surveys of both consumers and professional forecasters. In the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median value for inflation expectations over the next year jumped to 5.4 percent in March, its highest level since November 1981, and has moved sideways since then. A portion of the upward movement so far this year likely reflects the war in Ukraine and the accompanying increases in the prices of commodities, especially those related to energy and food. Longer-term expectations, which are more likely to influence actual inflation over time, moved up by less and remained above pre-pandemic levels. The Michigan survey’s median inflation expectation for the next 5 to 10 years rose to 3.3 percent in the June preliminary reading. If confirmed, this reading would be near the top of the range from the past 25 years. Nevertheless, it remains well below the corresponding measure of 1-yearahead inflation expectations. In the secondquarter Survey of Professional Forecasters, the median expectation for 10-year PCE inflation edged up to 2.4 percent, reflecting noticeable upward revisions to expected inflation this year and next but little change thereafter; the median expectation for 6 to 10 years ahead held steady at 2 percent. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation, which are based on financial instruments linked to inflation, are sending a similar message. A measure of consumer price index (CPI) inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities is little changed (on balance) since late 2021 and remains well below the corresponding measure of inflation compensation over the next 5 years. The Index of Common Inflation Expectations, which is produced by Federal Reserve Board staff and synthesizes information from a large range of near-term as well as longer-term expectation measures, edged up in the first half of this year and now stands at the high end of the range from the past 20 years. The labor market continued to tighten Payroll employment expanded an average of 488,000 per month in the first five months of the year. Payroll gains so far this year have been broad based across industries, with the leisure and hospitality sector continuing to see the largest gains as people continued their return to activities that had been cut back by the pandemic. The increase in payrolls was accompanied by further declines in the unemployment rate, which fell 0.3 percentage point over the first five months of the year to 3.6 percent in May, just above the bottom of its range over the past 50 years. The decline in the unemployment rate has been fairly broad based across age, educational attainment, gender, and ethnic and racial groups. These declines have helped employment of nearly all major demographic groups recover to near or above their levels before the pandemic.  While labor demand remained very strong, labor supply increased only modestly and stayed below pre-pandemic levels Demand for labor continued to be very strong in the first half of the year. At the end of April, there were 11.4 million job openings—60 percent above pre-pandemic levels and down a bit from the all-time high recorded in March. Meanwhile, the supply of labor rose only gradually and remained below pre-pandemic levels. The labor force participation rate (LFPR), which measures the share of people either working or actively seeking work, edged up just 0.1 percentage point in the first five months of the year—following a 0.4 percentage point improvement last year— to 62.3 percent in May. Despite these improvements, the LFPR remains 1.1 percentage points below its February 2020 level. About one-half of this decline in the participation rate was to be expected even in the absence of the pandemic, as additional members of the large baby-boom generation have reached retirement age. In addition, several pandemicrelated factors appear to be continuing to hold down the participation rate, including a pandemic-induced surge in retirements (beyond that implied by the aging of the baby boomers) and, to a diminishing extent, increased caregiving responsibilities and some continuing concerns about contracting COVID-19. In addition to subdued participation, a second factor constraining the size of the labor force has been a marked slowing in population growth since the start of the pandemic. Over 2020 and 2021, the working-age (16 and over) population grew by 0.4 percent per year on average—notably less than the 0.9 percentaverage rate over the previous five years. The slowing in population growth over 2020–21 was due to both a sharp decline in net immigration and a spike in COVID-related deaths. Had the population increased over 2020–21 at the same rate as over the previous five years, the labor force would have been about 1¾ million larger as of the second quarter of this year. As a result, labor markets remained extremely tight . . . Reflecting very strong demand for workers alongside still-subdued supply, a wide range of indicators have continued to point to an extremely tight labor market despite the fact that the level of payroll employment in May remained about 820,000 below the level in February 2020. The number of total available jobs, measured by total employment plus posted job openings, continued to far exceed the number of available workers, measured by the size of the labor force. The gap was about 5½ million at the end of April, near the highest level on record. The share of workers quitting jobs each month, an indicator of the availability of attractive job prospects, was 2.9 percent at the end of April, near the alltime high reported in November. Initial claims for unemployment benefits remain near the lowest levels observed in the past 50 years. Households’ and small businesses’ perceptions of labor market tightness were near or above the highest levels observed in the history of these series. And, finally, employers continued to report widespread hiring difficulties. That said, some possible signs of modest easing of labor market tightness have recently appeared. For example, as noted in the next section, some measures of wage growth appear to have moderated. And in the June 2022 Beige Book, employers in some Federal Reserve Districts reported some signs of modest improvement in worker availability. . . . and nominal wages continued to increase at a robust pace Reflecting very tight labor market conditions, nominal wages continued to rise at historically rapid rates. For example, the employment cost index (ECI) of total compensation rose 4.8 percent over the 12 months ending in March, well above 2.8 percent from a year earlier. The most recent readings include a surge in bonuses, which may reflect the challenges of retaining and hiring workers. In addition, wage growth as computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which tracks the median 12-month wage growth of individuals responding to the Current Population Survey, picked up markedly this year and rose more than 6 percent in May, well above the 3 to 4 percent pace reported over the previous few years.That said, there are some signs that nominal wage growth may be leveling off or moderating. The growth of wages and salaries as measured by the ECI moderated from 5.6 percent at an annual rate in the second half of last year to 5.2 percent early this year. And even as payroll employment continued to grow rapidly and the unemployment rate continued to fall, the three-month change in average hourly earnings declined from about 6 percent at an annual rate late last year to 4.5 percent in May, with the moderation in earnings growth particularly notable for employees in the sectors that experienced especially strong wage growth last year, such as leisure and hospitality. Following a period of solid growth, labor productivity softened The extent to which sizable wage gains raise firms’ unit costs and act as a source of inflation pressure depends importantly on the pace of productivity growth. Considerable uncertainty remains around the ultimate effects of the pandemic on productivity. From 2019 through 2021, productivity growth in the business sector picked up (albeit by less than compensation growth), averaging about 2¼ percent at an annual rate—about 1 percentage point faster than the average pace of growth over the previous decade. Some of this pickup in productivity growth might reflect persistent factors. For example, the pandemic resulted in a high rate of new business formation, the widespread adoption of remote work technology, and a wave of labor-saving investments. The latest reading, however, showed a decline in business-sector productivity in the first quarter of this year. While quarterly productivity data are notoriously volatile, this decline nevertheless highlights the possibility that some of the earlier productivity gains could prove transitory, perhaps reflecting worker effort initially surging in response to employment shortages and hiring difficulties and then subsequently returning to more normal levels. If the gap between wage growth and productivity growth remains comparably wide in the future, the result will be significant upward pressure on firms’ labor costs. Gross domestic product declined in the first quarter of 2022 after having surged in the fourth quarter of 2021 . . . Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported to have surged at a 6.9 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2021—and then to have declined at a 1.5 percent annual rate in the first quarter—because of fluctuations in net exports and inventory investment. These two categories of expenditures are volatile even in normal times, and they have been even more so in recent quarters. Some improvement in supply chain conditions late last year appears to have enabled firms to rebuild depleted inventories; inventory investment surged in the fourth quarter and then moderated to a still-elevated pace in the first quarter, thereby weighing on GDP growth. Other measures of activity, including employment, industrial production, and gross domestic income, indicate continued growth in the first quarter. . . . while growth in consumer spending and business investment was solid in the first quarter After abstracting from these volatile components, growth in private domestic final demand (consumer spending plus residential and business fixed investment—a measure that tends to be more stable and better reflects the strength of overall economic activity) was solid in the first quarter, supported by some unwinding of supply bottlenecks and a further reopening of the economy. The most recent spending data and other indicators suggest that private fixed investment may be moderating, but consumer spending remains strong and drag from inventory investment and net exports may be dissipating. As a result, private domestic final demand and real GDP appear on track to rise moderately in the second quarter. Real consumer spending growth remained strong . . . Real consumer spending—that is, spending after adjusting for inflation—continued to grow briskly, supported by a partial unwinding of supply bottlenecks and continued normalization of spending patterns as the pandemic fades. For example, spending on motor vehicles grew markedly in the first quarter, reflecting improvements in both domestic and foreign production, and spending on services (especially at restaurants) grew briskly. That said, consumer spending growth has moderated from its very rapid pace from early 2021 as fiscal support has declined from historical highs, some households have likely depleted excess savings accumulated during the pandemic, and inflation has eroded households’ purchasing power. The composition of spending remains more tilted toward goods and away from services than it was before the pandemic. Real goods spending is still well above its trend, while real spending on services remains below trend. Nevertheless, the composition continued to shift back toward services. While goods spending was only modestly higher in April compared with its average from late last year, services spending rose significantly. . . . supported by high levels of wealth Household wealth grew by roughly $30 trillion between late 2019 and late 2021 because of rises in equity and house prices along with the elevated rate of saving in 2020 and 2021. Since the beginning of the year, wealth has declined because of the drop in equity prices. Nevertheless, wealth remains well above pre-pandemic levels, providing continuing support for consumer spending. Consumer financing conditions were generally accommodative, especially for borrowers with stronger credit scores Financing has been generally available to support consumer spending. Following a period of widespread reported easing last year, standards on credit card loans eased somewhat further in the first quarter, whereas those on auto and other consumer loans changed little. Partly reflecting higher credit card purchase volumes, credit card balances grew rapidly in recent months. Even so, many credit card users still have ample unused credit. Auto loans grew briskly during the first quarter, consistent with the concurrent rebound in auto sales. Meanwhile, borrowing costs rose. However, they remain below pre-pandemic levels for credit cards and auto loans, partly reflecting strong consumer credit quality. Indeed, delinquency rates on consumer loans remain low relative to historical averages despite some recent increases among nonprime borrowers. Housing construction remained high but may be moderating . . . New single-family construction has remained well above pre-pandemic levels. However, new construction may be softening, with single-family permits turning down some in March and April. As in the past year, still-tight supplies of materials, labor, and other inputs may still be restraining new construction. Also, builders have become distinctly less optimistic about prospects for housing sales, perhaps owing to the sharp rise in mortgage rates. . . . while home sales fell amid low inventories and rising mortgage rates Home sales stepped down substantially from the very high levels prevailing late last year and are now close to pre-pandemic levels Some of this decline may have reflected further reductions in inventories of existing homes to historically low levels early in the year. In addition, the sharp increases in mortgage rates may have begun to moderate housing demand. Even so, financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative for borrowers who met standard loan criteria, and the terms of mortgage credit for households with lower credit scores continued to ease toward pre-pandemic levels. Listings, sales, and price data suggest that so far, demand remains strong relative to the pace at which homes are being made available for sale. For example, the share of homes off market within two weeks remains elevated, and as of April, several measures of national house prices were up about 20 percent from a year earlier, though less in real terms. Business fixed investment rose strongly in the first quarter but may now be moderating Investment in equipment and intangibles surged at a 12½ percent annual rate in the first quarter. Investment demand remained strong, as worker shortages and high-capacity utilization in manufacturing likely maintained strong incentives for firms to automate production and boost capital expenditures. In turn, strong investment demand continued to boost equipment prices in an environment of constrained supply, but there have been initial signs that supply constraints may have begun to ease. In particular, since late last year, shipments of capital goods have begun to catch up with orders. The most recent indicators suggest that the growth of investment in equipment and intangibles will slow significantly in the second quarter, possibly reflecting drag from tighter financial conditions. Investment in nonresidential structures declined moderately in the first quarter after falling more rapidly over the second half of 2021, and it appears on track to decline again in the second quarter. Declines in spending on nondrilling structures have been only partly offset by rapid increases in drilling investment, which reflect the recent rise in energy prices. Business financing conditions tightened somewhat but remained generally accommodative Credit remained available to most nonfinancial corporations, but financing conditions tightened somewhat, especially for lowerrated firms. Gross nonfinancial corporate bond issuance was solid in the first quarter but slowed somewhat in April and May, with speculative-grade bond issuance particularly weak. Leveraged loan issuance also declined notably in May, partly reflecting weakening demand from retail investors. The growth of business loans at banks picked up from the subdued pace of last year, reflecting stronger loan originations as well as a moderation in loan forgiveness associated with the Paycheck Protection Program. Credit also remained broadly available to small businesses. The share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to obtain loans (compared with three months earlier) remained low by historical standards. Loan origination data through April were consistent with credit availability being comparable with pre-pandemic levels amid gradually recovering demand for small business credit. Most measures of loan performance remained largely stable; through April, default and delinquency rates remained below their prepandemic levels. The strong U.S. demand has partly been met through a rapid rise in imports Driven by the continued strength in domestic economic activity, including still-strong demand for goods consumption, U.S. imports continued to grow at a rapid pace, surging well above their pre-pandemic trend. High levels of imported goods have kept international logistics channels operating under high pressure, which has continued to impair the timely delivery of goods to U.S. customers. Real goods exports have only recovered to pre-pandemic levels. Real exports and imports of services remain subdued, reflecting a slow recovery of international travel. Given the recent strength of imports relative to the milder recovery in exports, the nominal trade deficit widened further as a share of GDP. The support to economic activity provided by federal fiscal actions continued to diminish . . . In response to the pandemic, the federal government enacted fiscal policies to address the economic consequences of the pandemic. Because the boost to spending from these policies ended last year, the effects on demand are likely waning this year and weighing on GDP growth. . . . and, in turn, the budget deficit has fallen sharply from pandemic highs, and the growth of federal debt has moderated The Congressional Budget Office estimates that fiscal policies enacted since the start of the pandemic will increase federal deficits roughly $5.4 trillion by the end of fiscal year 2030, with the largest deficit effects having occurred in fiscal 2020 and 2021.11 These policies, combined with the effects of the automatic stabilizers—the reduction in tax receipts and increase in transfers that occur as a consequence of depressed economic activity—caused the federal deficit to surge to 15 percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2020 and remain elevated at 12½ percent in fiscal 2021. But with pandemic fiscal programs having largely ended and receipts surging, the deficit has fallen sharply thus far in fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 and, by the end of the fiscal year, is expected to be close to the deficits prevailing just before the pandemic. As a result of the fiscal support enacted during the pandemic, federal debt held by the public jumped to around 100 percent of nominal GDP in fiscal 2020—the highest debt-toGDP ratio since 1947. But with deficits falling and economic growth having rebounded, the debt-to-GDP ratio has since receded slightly from its recent peak. State and local government budget positions are remarkably strong . . . Federal policymakers provided a historic level of fiscal support to state and local governments during the pandemic, with aid totaling about $1 trillion. This aid has more than covered pandemic-related budget shortfalls in the aggregate. Moreover, following the pandemic-induced slump, total state tax collections—pushed up by the economic expansion—rose appreciably in 2021 and continued to grow rapidly in early 2022. In turn, this recovery in revenues has led some state governments to enact or consider enacting tax cuts. At the local level, property taxes have continued to rise apace, and the typically long lags between changes in the market value of real estate and changes in tax collections suggest that property tax revenues will rise quite substantially going forward, given the rise in house prices. . . . but hiring and construction outlays have continued to lag Despite the return to in-person schooling and the strong fiscal position of state and local governments, state and local government payrolls continued to expand only modestly in the first half of 2022. Employment levels have regained about 60 percent of their sizable pandemic losses, falling well short of the recovery in private payrolls. One reason for this disparity appears to be that public-sector wages have not kept pace with the rapid gains in the private sector, which may be inhibiting the ability of these governments to staff back up to pre-pandemic levels. Meanwhile, real construction outlays by state and local governments continued to decline in the first half of the year and are currently about 15 percent below pre-pandemic levels. Financial Developments The expected level of the federal funds rate over the next few years shifted up substantially In March, May, and June, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate a total of 1½ percentage points. The expected path of the federal funds rate over the next few years also shifted up substantially since late February. Economic data releases and FOMC communications were viewed by market participants as implying tighter monetary policy than previously expected. Market-based measures suggest that investors anticipate the federal funds rate to exceed 3.6 percent by the end of this year, which is about 2 percentage points higher than the level expected in late February. The same measures suggest that the federal funds rate is expected to peak at about 4 percent in mid-2023 before gradually declining to about 3.1 percent by the end of 2025, which is about 1.4 percentage points higher than the end-2025 rate expected in late February. Similarly, according to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants, both conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in April, the median of respondents’ projections for the most likely path of the federal funds rate shifted up significantly since January. Before late February, the expected path of the federal funds rate had started to increase notably in the third quarter of last year, in anticipation of increases in the target range. Consistent with the rise in the expected path of the federal funds rate, yields on Treasury securities and corporate bonds, as well as mortgage rates, all started to increase materially at a similar time. Meanwhile, broad equity price indexes have declined on net. Overall, these moves in asset prices suggest tightening of financial conditions even before the initial increase in the target range of the federal funds rate occurred in March. Yields on U.S. nominal Treasury securities also rose considerably Yields on nominal Treasury securities across maturities have risen considerably since late February. After a brief dip in late February, following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, yields rose steadily amid higher inflationary pressures and associated expectations for monetary policy tightening. The increases in nominal Treasury yields were primarily accounted for by rising real yields. Uncertainty about longer-term interest rates—as measured by the implied volatility embedded in the prices of near-term options on 10-year interest rate swaps—also increased significantly, reportedly reflecting, in part, an increase in uncertainty about the policy outlook. Yields on other long-term debt increased substantially Across credit categories, corporate bond yields have increased substantially and spreads over yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities have increased notably since late February. Corporate bond yields and spreads are somewhat above the historical median values of their respective historical distributions since the mid-1990s. Municipal bond yields also increased significantly while spreads increased somewhat since late February. Spreads on municipal bonds are now moderately above their historical medians. On net, corporate bond spreads are moderately above their prepandemic levels, and municipal bond spreads are near levels prevailing shortly before the pandemic. While the widening of corporate bond spreads since late February appears to partly reflect a deterioration in market expectations of future credit quality, corporate and municipal credit quality thus far in 2022 have remained strong. So far this year, defaults have been low, and upgrades of bond ratings have outpaced downgrades in both markets. Since late February, yields on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an important pricing factor for home mortgage rates—increased significantly, as longer-term Treasury yields increased and spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened. MBS spreads increased as market participants’ expectations of a gradual reduction in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet shifted to a faster reduction. Broad equity price indexes declined sharply, on net, amid substantial volatility Broad equity price indexes were volatile and declined sharply, on net, amid sustained inflation pressures and expectations of monetary policy tightening, as well as heightened uncertainty regarding Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the economic outlook. Bank stock prices also declined on net. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—rose notably to elevated levels in the days following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The VIX trended down for some time only to increase again and remain elevated since late April amid a notable deterioration in risk sentiment. Markets for Treasury securities, mortgagebacked securities, corporate and municipal bonds, and equities generally functioned in an orderly way, but some measures of liquidity deteriorated Liquidity conditions in the market for Treasury securities, which had deteriorated somewhat since late 2021, in part as a result of heightened interest rate risk, worsened further in late February following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Market depth—a gauge of the ability to transact in large volumes at quotes posted by market makers—for Treasury securities fell and remains at historically low levels. Bid-ask spreads increased somewhat. However, trading volumes remained within normal ranges, suggesting that market functioning was not materially impaired. The decreases in depth were the greatest for bonds with shorter maturities because the prices of those securities are more sensitive to expectations for monetary policy over the near term. The market for MBS has functioned in an orderly way since late February, even as some measures of liquidity conditions deteriorated. Measures of market functioning in corporate and municipal bond markets indicated that the markets have remained liquid and trading conditions have stayed stable since late February without substantive disruptions around the time of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Transaction costs in the corporate bond market and in the municipal bond market have both picked up somewhat since late February, and in the corporate bond market, bid-ask spreads are modestly above pre-pandemic levels. Transaction costs remain fairly low by historical standards.. Liquidity in equity markets has declined since late 2021 in part because of rising uncertainty about the outlook for monetary policy as well as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and has remained at low levels since then. Market depth based on the S&P 500 futures is below pre-pandemic levels and currently in the bottom decile of its historical distribution since 2018. Short-term funding market conditions remained stable . . . Conditions in money markets have been stable and orderly. Increases in the target range for the federal funds rate fully passed through to market overnight rates. The effective federal funds rate and other unsecured overnight rates have been a few basis points below the interest rate on reserve balances since late February. The Secured Overnight Financing Rate has been at or below the offering rate at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, given ample liquidity and a limited supply of Treasury bills. Softness in repurchase agreement rates contributed to ongoing increases in ON RRP take-up, which reached an average of around $2.1 trillion per day in June. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine does not appear to have left a material imprint in the broad U.S. dollar funding markets to date. In late February and early March, spreads on some longer-tenor commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit increased notably amid uncertainties around monetary policy tightening and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. These spreads have broadly narrowed since mid-March. Weighted average maturities for money market funds (MMFs) stand at low levels, as MMFs tend to adjust their portfolios toward shortertenor instruments to position for rising interest rates around monetary policy tightening cycles. Bank credit expanded in the first quarter amid strong loan demand Strong loan growth pushed the ratio of bank credit to GDP higher in the first quarter. The acceleration in growth was broad based, with balance growth accelerating for most major loan categories. Growth was particularly strong for commercial and industrial and credit card loans, for which demand continued to strengthen in the first quarter according to the April 2022 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices. More recently, loan growth moderated somewhat in May amid higher rates and a more uncertain economic outlook but remained strong. Bank profitability also remained strong but fell somewhat in the first quarter, in part as a result of declines in investment banking revenue and the fading boost to profitability from the release in previous quarters of loan loss reserves accumulated in 2020. Nevertheless, higher interest rates and strong loan demand are expected to support bank profitability in the near term. Delinquency rates on bank loans remained low. International Developments Economic activity continued to recover abroad . . . Economic activity continued to recover in many foreign economies in the first quarter, albeit at a slower pace than last year’s strong performance. The still-robust growth in many foreign economies reflected the recovery in many parts of the world from previous pandemic shocks amid progress on vaccinations and a greater ability to cope with outbreaks without extensive lockdowns. Moreover, unemployment rates in many advanced foreign economies (AFEs) continued to decline and are now below their prepandemic levels. More recently, headwinds from the war in Ukraine and COVID-19 lockdowns in China weighed on the foreign recovery. The slowing of activity has been particularly sharp in China, with recent indicators plunging amid COVID-related mobility restrictions. In Europe, recent indicators also show a sharp slowing, reflecting lower real incomes, reduced confidence of households and businesses in the economy, and continued supply chain disruptions.. . . while foreign inflation remained on the rise in most economies . . . As in the United States, inflation in many foreign economies has continued to rise. Soaring energy prices have remained a major driver of higher inflation in AFEs, and rising food prices accounted for most of the increase in inflation in emerging market economies (EMEs). Food and energy price rises have made up the bulk of the increase, though supply chain disruptions have contributed as well, and inflationary pressures have broadened as elevated input costs are increasingly passed through to prices of goods and services. . . . and many foreign central banks are tightening monetary policy In response to elevated inflation and broadening price pressures, many AFE central banks increased policy rates, and some started to reduce the size of their balance sheets. Concerns over the persistence of inflationary pressures led several EME central banks, primarily those in Latin America, to raise their policy rates further. Several central banks in emerging Asia, where inflation had been more subdued but has recently begun to rise, also started to raise policy rates.  Financial conditions abroad tightened since the beginning of the year . . . As central banks raised interest rates or signaled that they would do so soon, marketbased policy expectations and sovereign bond yields rose significantly in many AFEs. The rise in sovereign bond yields reflects increases in both real yields, arising from less accommodative central bank communications, and inflation compensation. Since the start of the year, short- and mediumterm inflation compensation measures in the euro area rose more than in many other AFEs, reflecting the region’s larger exposure to the inflationary pressures stemming from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Sovereign bond spreads over German bund yields for euroarea peripheral countries recently widened significantly. These moves partially retraced following an unscheduled meeting of the European Central Bank (ECB) on June 15, where the ECB indicated that it would take action to address potential fragmentation in euro-area sovereign bond markets. Concerns about persistently high inflation and associated monetary policy tightening across countries, as well as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and COVID lockdowns in China, weighed on foreign risky asset prices. Equities in many AFEs have declined since the beginning of the year. Equity declines were particularly strong in the euro area, given the region’s trade and financial linkages to Russia and concerns over the possibility of the conflict spreading to other parts of Europe. Euro-area corporate bond spreads have widened since the beginning of the year and are well above their pre-pandemic levels. Financial conditions in EMEs have tightened since the beginning of the year but are not particularly tight relative to historical norms. EME-dedicated funds have experienced net outflows so far this quarter, reversing the inflows in the first quarter of this year. Outflows have been concentrated in Asia, especially China. Since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, investment funds that focus on emerging Europe have experienced particularly rapid outflows. EME sovereign bond spreads widened considerably. European emerging market equities and Chinese equities declined significantly, the latter amid COVIDrelated lockdowns and related supply chain constraints as well as continued regulatory uncertainty. Latin American equities, supported in part by rising commodity prices, declined by less than other emerging markets. . . . and the dollar appreciated notably Since the beginning of the year, the broad dollar index—a measure of the trade-weighted value of the dollar against foreign currencies— has risen notably amid safe-haven flows and increases in U.S. yields. The dollar appreciated more against AFE currencies than EME currencies, as rising commodity prices supported Latin American currencies. The Chinese renminbi depreciated against the dollar amid growth concerns related to the lockdowns in China and weaker-than-expected Chinese data releases. Among AFE currencies, the dollar appreciated particularly strongly against the Japanese yen, largely reflecting the widening U.S.–Japanese yield differential.Part 2 Monetary PolicyThe Federal Open Market Committee has swiftly raised the target range for the federal funds rate and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate With inflation far too high, well above the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) 2 percent objective, and with tight labor market conditions, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate off the effective lower bound in March. The Committee continued to raise the target range in May and June, bringing it to 1½ to 1¾ percent following the June meeting. The Committee has also indicated that it anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. The Committee ceased net purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgagebacked securities in early March and began the process of significantly reducing its securities holdings on June 1 Reflecting the need to firm the stance of monetary policy amid elevated inflation and tight labor market conditions, the Committee ended net asset purchases in early March and announced its plans for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in May.13 Consistent with the Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in January, the May statement outlined the Committee’s intention to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA). Specifically, beginning in June, principal payments from securities held in the SOMA will be reinvested to the extent that they exceed monthly caps. For Treasury securities, the cap is initially set at $30 billion per month and after three months will increase to $60 billion per month. For agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, the cap is initially set at $17.5 billion per month and after three months will increase to $35 billion per month. Reductions in securities holdings will slow and then stop when reserve balances are somewhat above the level the Committee judges to be consistent with efficient implementation of policy in an ample-reserves regime. Once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline at a slower pace—reflecting growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities—until the Committee judges that reserve balances are at the level required for implementing policy efficiently in an ample regime, at which point reserve management purchases of securities would likely begin to maintain ample reserves. The Committee also noted that it is prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. The FOMC will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on inflation and inflation expectations, wages, other measures of labor market conditions, financial and international developments, and public health. In addition to considering a wide range of economic and financial data and information gathered from business contacts and other informed parties around the country, such as participants in conversations held as part of the Fed Listens initiative, policymakers routinely consult prescriptions for the policy interest rate provided by various monetary policy rules. These rule prescriptions can provide useful benchmarks for the FOMC. Although simple rules cannot capture the complexities of monetary policy and many practical considerations make it undesirable for the FOMC to adhere strictly to the prescriptions of any specific rule, some principles of good monetary policy can be illustrated by these policy rules. Changes to the policy rate were implemented smoothly, and the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was roughly stable As in the previous tightening cycle and consistent with the implementation of monetary policy in an ample-reserves regime, the Federal Reserve used its administered rates—the interest rate on reserve balances (IORB) and the offering rate at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility—to implement increases to the target range for the policy rate. The administered rates were effective in raising the effective federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates with the Committee’s target range. The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was roughly stable at $9 trillion, or 36 percent of U.S. nominal GDP, from February through May, and the process to significantly reduce securities holdings began on June 1. Reserve balances have fallen from their all-time highs of a little over $4 trillion to around $3.3 trillion because of increasing take-up at the ON RRP. Part 3 Summary of Economic ProjectionsIn conjunction with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 14–15, 2022, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2022 to 2024 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value— and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longerrun projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability.Developments in Global Supply ChainsBottlenecks in global production and transportation remain a major impediment for both domestic and foreign firms. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the widespread COvID-19 lockdowns in China have exacerbated strains in global supply networks and have led to greater uncertainty about the timing of improvement in supply conditions. Despite this turbulence in the global supply network, U.S. manufacturers have been recording solid output growth for more than a year. There have been gains in domestic motor vehicle production, as the supply of semiconductors has recovered somewhat. In addition, survey results suggest shorter supplier delivery times and lower order backlogs relative to their late 2021 levels. Notwithstanding these improvements, backlogs and delivery times for the sector remain elevated, and light vehicle assemblies are still a bit below pre-pandemic levels, with low dealer inventories continuing to constrain sales. For some materials that had previously been in short supply—such as lumber and steel— prices have declined from notable highs. Even so, the overall producer price index for manufacturing in April was more than 18 percent above its yearearlier level. Progress has been similarly mixed for bottlenecks in the transportation of goods. The number of ships waiting for berths at West Coast ports has declined noticeably, as port throughput has remained high, although manufacturers continue to cite logistics and transportation constraints as reasons for lower output.Risks to supply chain conditions abound, including those arising from COvID-19 lockdowns in China beginning in mid-March and the ongoing war in Ukraine.1 Committed to their zero-COVID strategy, Chinese authorities ratcheted up restrictions quickly in the face of rising cases of the Omicron variant, which included a complete lockdown of Shanghai. The containment strategy managed to reduce case counts, allowing authorities to begin relaxing some citywide restrictions in late April. The lockdowns drove the largest monthly declines in Chinese activity since early 2020, with industrial production dropping about 13 percent between February and April before recovering some in May. With severely disrupted domestic logistics, supplier delivery times increased sharply in April and continued increasing in May, but not as strongly. Chinese international trade was also hit, contracting in the three months before April. As Chinese production continues to recover, the associated rebound in trade flows may further strain international transportation networks.The invasion of Ukraine by Russia is causing economic hardship. For instance, the conflict has disrupted global commodity markets in which Ukraine and Russia account for significant shares of global exports. Notably, energy prices have soared, as increasing geopolitical tensions have put the supply of Russian oil and gas to Europe at risk. Indeed, Russian energy exports have already been falling amid embargos on Russian oil, self-sanctioning by some companies, transportation difficulties, and Russia’s decision to halt gas deliveries to several European countries. The prices of several nonfuel commodities that are vital inputs to some manufacturing industries jumped in the early days of the conflict, including neon gas (an input in semiconductor chip production), palladium (an input in semiconductors and catalytic converters), nickel (an input in electric vehicles’ batteries), and platinum. However, prices have since retreated to near pre-invasion levels as major disruptions have failed to materialize thus far. Finally, blocked shipping routes in the Black Sea have severed the region’s agricultural exports, disrupting global food markets. As a result, prices of corn, wheat, sunflower oil, and fertilizer have climbed to record-high levels, raising concerns of food insecurity across the globe. Further aggravating the situation, a number of countries introduced export bans on some food commodities to contain rising domestic food prices. Thus far, the war appears to have had more limited effects on other aspects of global supply chains. The effect on supplier delivery times across Europe has been muted, suggesting that the repercussions for manufacturers in the region have been relatively modest so far outside of the shifts in commodity prices The global transportation system has also proved mostly resilient to the war, with signs of further strain in only a couple of sectors. Oil tanker charter rates spiked, boosted by a rise in demand as oil started to move to new markets, while truck transportation prices rose further, reflecting higher diesel fuel costs.Developments in Employment and Earnings across GroupsLabor market gains have been robust over the past year and a half as the economy continues to recover from the effects of the pandemic. Historically, economic downturns have tended to exacerbate long-standing differences in employment and earnings across demographic groups, especially for minorities and for those with less education, and this pattern was especially true early on in the pandemic. However, as pandemic-related factors have eased and the labor market has recovered, groups with larger employment declines early in the pandemic have had especially large increases lately. Now employment and real earnings of nearly all major demographic groups are near or above their levels before the pandemic, and employment rates are again near multidecade highs. Different age groups have had very different employment experiences over the course of the pandemic. Early in the pandemic, the employment-topopulation (EPOP) ratio for people aged 16 to 24 not only declined by much more than that for people of prime age (25 to 54) and those aged 55 to 64, but also recovered much more quickly. Conversely, employment recovered more slowly for prime-age people throughout 2020 and nearly all of 2021. But in late 2021 and early 2022, the prime-age EPOP rose quickly, such that now all three of these age groups’ EPOP ratios have essentially recovered to their pre-pandemic levels. The EPOP ratio for those aged 65 and over, however, remains about 1 percentage point below its pre-pandemic level—a level it has maintained through much of the pandemic. The lower EPOP ratio for that group is entirely attributable to a lower labor force participation rate, which in turn largely reflects an increase in retirements since the onset of the pandemic. A closer look at the prime-age group shows that there has been considerable heterogeneity in the pace of the employment recovery across race and ethnicity, educational attainment, and parental status. Employment for Blacks and Hispanics not only declined by more than that for whites and Asians early in the pandemic, but also recovered more quickly since the end of last year. In addition, men and women with high school degrees or less saw larger declines and a faster recovery. Similarly, gaps in employment between prime-age mothers and nonmothers that widened through 2020 have essentially closed. By April 2022, employment for all of those groups was near or above its pre-pandemic level. These differences in the timing of the employment recovery across different demographic groups partly reflect the evolution of the pandemic’s effect on the labor market. For instance, social-distancing restrictions and concerns about contracting or spreading COvID-19 had likely inhibited employment in inperson services. As these restrictions and concerns have waned, employment of groups more commonly employed in in-person services, such as those with less education and some minority groups, has recovered quickly.3 Further, the closing of many schools and childcare facilities for the 2020–21 school year due to elevated levels of COVID cases likely held back the employment recovery of parents, as many families faced uncertainties about the consistent availability of in-person education for school-age children and childcare for younger children. The effects appear to have been particularly acute for mothers, especially Black and Hispanic mothers, as well as those with less education. However, with schools having generally provided in-person education for the 2021–22 school year, these childcare burdens likely eased, allowing many parents to reenter the workforce.Although the gaps in employment outcomes across groups that widened during the pandemic have diminished, the considerable gaps that existed before the pandemic remain. For example, the EPOP ratio for whites of prime age remains more than 3 percentage points above those for prime-age Black and Hispanic people; the EPOP ratio of college-educated, prime-age people is about 15 percentage points higher than that of prime-age people with high school degrees or less; and the EPOP ratio for prime-age mothers is about 5 percentage points below that of non-mothers—all similar in size to the gaps that existed before the pandemic. The broad-based nature of the labor market recovery is also apparent in workers’ earnings, which have grown rapidly as employment surged in 2021 and early 2022. As of 2022:Q1, the median full-time worker’s usual weekly earnings had grown 12.3 percent relative to pre-pandemic levels—implying real earnings growth of 3.1 percent. Although this earnings growth has been widespread, it has been largest for women, minorities, young workers, and workers with less than a high school education. The growth in earnings for some demographic groups has been sufficiently robust to shrink some pre-pandemic disparities in real earnings between groups. For instance, the gap in median full-time real earnings for women versus men is slightly smaller in 2022:Q1 than it was in 2019, as is the gap in median real earnings between Black and white fulltime workers.Developments Related to Financial StabilityThis discussion reviews vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system. The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas: asset valuations, business and household debt, leverage in the financial sector, and funding risks. With inflation running higher than expected, the invasion of Ukraine, and the pandemic’s continued effects on supply chains and consumer demand patterns, uncertainty about the economic outlook increased, and prices of some financial assets fluctuated widely. Treasury yields increased markedly, and valuation pressures in corporate securities markets eased, but real estate prices have risen further this year despite a rise in mortgage rates. While business and household debt has been growing solidly, the ratio of private nonfinancial credit to gross domestic product (GDP) decreased to near pre-pandemic levels and most indicators of credit quality remained robust. Large bank capital ratios dipped in the first quarter, but overall leverage in the financial sector appears moderate and little changed this year. A few signs of funding pressures emerged amid the escalation of geopolitical tensions. However, broad funding markets proved resilient, and with direct exposures of U.S. financial institutions to Russia and Ukraine being small, financial spillovers have been limited to date. Nevertheless, the effect of high inflation, supply chain disruptions, and the ongoing geopolitical tensions remain substantial sources of uncertainty with the potential to further stress the financial system. valuation measures based on current expectations of cash flows decreased in some markets but continued to be high relative to historical norms. Reflecting a less accommodative monetary policy stance associated with elevated inflation and a tight labor market, yields on Treasury securities increased markedly and reached somewhat above their pre-pandemic levels. Broad equity prices fluctuated widely and declined sharply. Prices relative to earnings forecasts declined from previously very elevated levels but were still above their historical median. Corporate-to-Treasury spreads widened but remained below their historical median. Spreads on leveraged loans were little changed, and leveraged loan issuance remained solid. House prices continued to rise at a rapid pace that further outstripped rent growth. Commercial real estate prices also rose further, with some price indexes surpassing their 2006 peaks. The rapid growth of nominal GDP outpaced the growth of total debt of nonfinancial businesses and households. The ratio of the aggregate debt owed by the private nonfinancial sector to nominal GDP further declined to near pre-pandemic levels. Net leverage of large nonfinancial businesses held stable at below pre-pandemic levels, supported by ample cash holdings. Fueled by strong earnings and low borrowing costs, the ratio of earnings to interest expenses for the median fi rm among public nonfinancial businesses rose to its highest level in two decades, indicating that large firms were better able to service debt. However, for firms in industries hit hardest by the pandemic, leverage remains elevated and interest coverage ratios are lower. The financial position of many households continued to improve. Household debt relative to nominal GDP as well as mortgage, auto, and credit card delinquencies were in the bottom range of the levels observed over the past 20 years. Household credit growth has been almost exclusively among prime-rated borrowers, including for residential mortgages. Nonetheless, some households remained financially strained and vulnerable to adverse shocks during this period of heightened uncertainty. vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage are well within their historical range. Risk-based capital ratios at domestic bank holding companies declined some in the first quarter of 2022 but remained well above regulatory requirements. Banks increased loan loss provisions to reflect higher uncertainty about the economic outlook and continued to report that rising interest rates will support their profitability going forward. However, higher interest rates cause losses in the market value of banks’ long-term fi xedrate assets. Leverage remained high at life insurance companies and was likely somewhat elevated at hedge funds, though the most comprehensive data for hedge funds are considerably lagged. vulnerabilities of most U.S. financial institutions to the Russian invasion of Ukraine appear to be limited. Some nonbank financial intermediaries—such as commodity trading firms—have been directly affected by the Russia–Ukraine conflict, but loan exposures of large U.S. banks to these firms and borrowers in Ukraine and Russia are small. However, several indirect channels—heightened volatility in asset markets; new disruptions in payment, clearing, or settlement systems; and interconnections with large European banks—could adversely affect the U.S. economy and financial system. Funding risks at domestic banks and brokerdealers are low, but structural vulnerabilities persist at some money market funds (MMFs), bond funds, and stablecoins. Banks relied only modestly on short-term wholesale funding, and the share of high-quality liquid assets at banks remained historically high. Assets under management at prime and tax-exempt MMFs have continued to decline, but these funds remain a structural vulnerability due to their susceptibility to runs. In December 2021, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed reforms to MMFs, including the adoption of swing pricing for certain fund types, increased liquidity requirements, and other measures meant to make them more resilient to redemptions. The Russian invasion of Ukraine does not appear to have left a material imprint on broader short-term funding markets. Trading conditions in those markets have been stable, issuance continued, and spreads remained well below the levels reached in March 2020. Although depth in markets for Treasury securities and some commodity and equity derivatives has been low by historical standards, those markets have functioned normally after the initial shock to the nickel market. Elevated market volatility—particularly in commodity markets—caused central counterparties (CCPs) to make larger margin calls. To date, clearing members have been able to meet these margin calls, and, in general, CCPs effectively managed the increased risks and higher trading volumes. The aggregate value of stablecoins—digital assets that aim to maintain a stable value relative to a national currency or other reference assets—grew rapidly over the past year to more than $180 billion in March 2022. The stablecoin sector remained highly concentrated, with the three largest stablecoin issuers— Tether, USD Coin, and Binance USD—constituting more than 80 percent of the total market value. The collapse in the value of certain stablecoins and recent strains experienced in markets for other digital assets demonstrate the fragility of such structures. More generally, stablecoins that are not backed by safe and sufficiently liquid assets and are not subject to appropriate regulatory standards create risks to investors and potentially to the financial system, including susceptibility to potentially destabilizing runs. These vulnerabilities may be exacerbated by a lack of transparency regarding the riskiness and liquidity of assets backing stablecoins. In addition, the increasing use of stablecoins to meet margin requirements for levered trading in other cryptocurrencies may amplify volatility in demand for stablecoins and heighten redemption risks. The President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency have made recommendations to address prudential risks posed by stablecoins. A routine survey of market contacts on salient shocks to financial stability highlights several important risks. Stresses in Europe related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine or in emerging markets could spill over to the United States. In addition, higher or more persistent infl ation and greater-than-expected increases in interest rates could negatively affect domestic economic activity, asset prices, credit quality, and financial conditions more generally. As concerns over cyber risk have increased, U.S. government agencies and their private-sector partners have been stepping up their efforts to protect the financial system and other critical infrastructures. These risks, if realized, could interact with fi nancial vulnerabilities and pose additional risks to the U.S. fi nancial system. Invasion of Ukraine and Commodity Markets Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and subsequent international sanctions disrupted global trade in commodities, leading to surging prices and heightened volatility in agriculture, energy, and metals markets. These markets include spot and forward markets for physical commodities as well as futures, options, and swaps markets that involve an array of financial intermediaries and infrastructures. Stresses in financial markets linked to commodities could disrupt the efficient production, processing, and transportation of commodities by interfering with the ability of commodity producers, consumers, and traders to hedge risks. Such stresses can also increase liquidity and credit risks for financial institutions that are active in commodity markets. To date, however, financial market stresses do not appear to have exacerbated the negative effects on broader economic activity or created substantial pressure on key financial intermediaries, including banks. Since the invasion, for most commodities, futures trading volumes and open interest—the number of contracts outstanding at the end of the day—have remained in normal ranges.Global InflationOver the past year, inflation increased rapidly in many foreign economies, reflecting soaring commodity prices, pandemic-related supply disruptions, and imbalances between demand for goods and services. More recently, the war in Ukraine and the renewals of COvID-19 lockdowns in China have amplified inflationary pressures, particularly through higher food and energy prices.The recent surge in foreign inflation was mainly concentrated in volatile components, such as food and energy prices, with these components contributing much more to inflation in recent months than in prepandemic years. In particular, energy prices accounted for almost half of the 12-month headline inflation rate for the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) in April. Meanwhile, food prices are driving inflation in emerging market economies, largely due to the war and its threat to already fragile food security in these economies. Price pressures have recently broadened to core inflation, as elevated input costs have been increasingly passed through to prices of goods and services that have not been directly affected by supply disruptions and soaring commodity prices. This broadening of inflationary pressure is reflected in increases in the share of categories of core goods and services prices rising more than 3 percent in most major AFEs. Furthermore, the rebalancing of demand away from goods toward services—which would have reduced upward pressures on prices of goods—has been slower than expected so far, contributing to the persistence of inflation pressures. Persistent and widening price pressures are also evident in increases in market- and survey-based inflation expectations, although these expectations generally remain anchored in historical ranges. Even though such increases in inflation expectations might be a welcome development for economies such as Japan and the euro area that have experienced persistently below-target inflation in recent decades, many foreign central banks have been tightening monetary policy amid broadened price pressures and tight labor markets.Monetary Policy in Foreign EconomiesWith inflation rising sharply across the globe, central banks have broadly shifted toward tighter monetary policy. Policy tightening started last year, as some emerging market central banks—particularly those in Latin America—increased policy rates out of concern that sharp increases in inflation could become entrenched in inflation expectations. Among the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), central banks of some smaller economies (New Zealand and Norway) with particularly strong recoveries were the first to hike their policy rates last autumn, while policy expectations for some major AFE central banks began to rise sharply. Last December, the Bank of England (BOE) raised its policy rate from 0.1 percent to 0.25 percent, citing a strong labor market and rising inflation. This year, with U.K. inflation picking up more sharply, the BOE followed with additional rate hikes in subsequent meetings, taking its policy rate to 1 percent in May. The Bank of Canada (BOC) began raising its policy rate in March with a 25 basis point hike. In response to sharply higher inflation and the view that economic slack in the Canadian economy had been absorbed, the BOC followed with hikes of 50 basis points each in April and June, bringing the policy rate to 1.5 percent. As inflation concerns grew more widespread, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) and the Swedish Riksbank pivoted sharply to hike rates in May, and the European Central Bank (ECB) recently stated that it intends to start raising its policy rate in July. Supporting the overall thrust toward tighter global monetary policy, several AFE central banks that had expanded their balance sheets over the past two years are now allowing them to shrink. In recent months, the BOE, the BOC, the RBA, and the Swedish Riksbank have begun to shrink their balance sheets by stopping full reinvestments of maturing government bond holdings. The BOE has indicated that it will consider accelerating the pace of balance sheet reduction by selling U.K. government bonds; it will provide an update in August on a strategy for possible future bond sales. After tapering its purchases in recent months, the ECB announced it will end net asset purchases as of July 1. Not all major foreign central banks have been tightening monetary policy. The Bank of Japan (BOJ) has maintained its overnight policy rate at negative 0.1 percent, given its outlook that Japanese inflation will remain subdued in the medium term. The BOJ also vowed to continue purchasing Japanese government bonds to defend its current yield curve control target band around 0 percent for the 10-year nominal yield. In addition, the People’s Bank of China recently increased its monetary stimulus through reductions in reserve requirement ratios and some key benchmark interest rates amid a weakening of economic activity in China.Monetary Policy Rules in the Current EnvironmentSimple interest rate rules relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal funds rate, to a small number of other economic variables—typically including the current deviation of inflation from its target value and a measure of resource slack in the economy. Policymakers consult policy rate prescriptions derived from a variety of policy rules as part of their monetary policy deliberations without mechanically following the prescriptions of any particular rule. Recently, inflation has run well above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, the U.S. economy has been very strong, and labor market conditions have been very tight. Against this background, the simple monetary policy rules considered in this discussion have called for raising the federal funds rate significantly. Starting in March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) began raising the target range for the federal funds rate and indicated that it anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. The FOMC also began the process of significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Selected Policy Rules: Descriptions In many economic models, desirable economic outcomes can be achieved if monetary policy responds in a predictable way to changes in economic conditions. In recognition of this idea, economists have analyzed many monetary policy rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)” rule, and the “first difference” rule. In addition to these rules, figure A shows a “balanced-approach (shortfalls)” rule, which represents one simple way to illustrate the Committee’s focus on shortfalls from maximum employment. These rules embody key design principles of good monetary policy, including that the policy rate should be adjusted forcefully enough over time to ensure a return of inflation to the central bank’s longer-run objective and to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with that objective. All five rules feature the difference between inflation and the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. The five rules use the unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference between an estimate of the rate of unemployment in the longer run (ut LR) and the current unemployment rate; the fi rst-difference rule includes the change in the unemployment rate gap rather than its level. All but the fi rst-difference rule include an estimate of the neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt LR). Unlike the other simple rules featured here, the adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially below the effective lower bound. To make up for the cumulative shortfall in policy accommodation following a recession during which the federal funds rate is constrained by its effective lower bound, the adjustedTaylor (1993) rule prescribes delaying the return of the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the standard Taylor (1993) rule until after the economy begins to recover. Selected Policy Rules: Prescriptions Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the federal funds rate under the five simple rules considered. For each quarterly period, the figure reports the policy rates prescribed by the rules, taking as given the prevailing economic conditions and survey-based estimates of ut LR and rt LR at the time. All of the rules considered called for a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy in response to the pandemicdriven recession. The recent elevated inflation readings imply that the prescriptions for the federal funds rate of simple policy rules in the first quarter of 2022 are well above their pre-pandemic levels, at between 4 percent and 7 percent. Overall, the prescriptions of all simple rules have risen notably over the past few quarters as inflation readings climbed further above 2 percent. Policy Rules: Limitations Simple policy rules are also subject to important limitations. One important limitation is that simple policy rules do not take into account the other tools of monetary policy, such as large-scale asset purchases. A second important limitation is that simple rules respond to only a small set of economic variables and thus necessarily abstract from many of the factors that the FOMC considers when it assesses the appropriate setting of the policy rate. Another limitation is that most simple policy rules do not take into account the effective lower bound on interest rates, which limits the extent to which the policy rate can be lowered to support the economy. This constraint was particularly evident in the aftermath of the pandemic-driven recession, when the lower bound on the policy rate motivated the FOMC’s other policy actions to support the economy. Finally, simple policy rules generally abstract from the risk-management considerations associated with uncertainty about economic relationships and the evolution of the economy. As a result, the usefulness of simple policy rules can be limited in unusual economic circumstances.Developments in the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Money MarketsWith the Federal Reserve’s net asset purchases concluding in March, the size of the balance sheet has been roughly stable at $9 trillion since February 2022. At its May 2022 meeting, the FOMC announced plans for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet starting June 1. Balance sheet reduction, along with increases in the target range for the federal funds rate, firms the stance of monetary policy. Despite the roughly constant total size of the balance sheet, reserves—the largest liability on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet—have continued to fall significantly since February 2022, reflecting growth in take-up at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility. In addition, the Treasury General Account (TGA)—another volatile liability— rose considerably upon larger than expected tax receipts and peaked just short of $1 trillion on June 2 before retracing the movement. Usage at the ON RRP facility has risen $496 billion since February 2022 to stand at a record $2.2 trillion at the time of this report. Low rates on repurchase agreements—reflecting abundant liquidity in the banking system and limited Treasury bill supply—have contributed to this increasingly elevated participation. In addition, uncertainty about the magnitude and pace of policy rate increases contributed to a preference for short-duration assets, like those provided by the ON RRP facility. The ON RRP facility is intended to help keep the effective federal funds rate from falling below the target range set by the FOMC, as institutions with access to the ON RRP should be unwilling to lend funds below the ON RRP’s pre-announced offering rate. The facility continued to serve this intended purpose, and the set of administered rates—interest on reserve balances (IORB) and the ON RRP offering rate—was effective at raising and maintaining the effective federal funds rate within the target range during the policy rate adjustments that have taken place since March. Going forward, the planned balance sheet decline will drain reserves from the banking system and add longer-duration assets, which will likely put upward pressure on short-term rates and reduce demand at the ON RRP facility. The Committee will monitor the evolution of reserves and other liabilities to ensure a smooth entry into efficient operation of monetary policy in an ample-reserves regime.Forecast UncertaintyThe economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the second year, and 0.7 to 5.3 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the current year, 0.7 to 3.3 percent in the second year, and 0.6 to 3.4 percent in the third year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projections are summarized in the bottom-left panelsof those figures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to participants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summarized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of shortterm interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years.
