Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis In 2020, facing the sudden outbreak of COVID-19, the PBC adopted a two-pronged approach to coordinating pandemic containment with economic and social development. The sound monetary policy is being pursued with more flexibility and appropriateness to guide the stable growth of monetary and credit supply, continuous optimization of the credit structure, and a significant decline in financing costs, thus cushioning the economy from the effects of the pandemic. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In Q1 2020, in accordance with the requirement that sound monetary policies should be more flexible and appropriate, the PBC intensified countercyclical adjustments and employed a monetary policy toolkit that included RRR cuts and the medium-term lending facility (MLF) to release medium and long-term liquidity. Open market operations were conducted flexibly to maintain adequate liquidity in the banking system at a reasonable level. The PBC also guided a steady decline in money market interest rates and smoothed operations in the financial market. At the end of March, the excess reserve ratio for financial institutions registered 2.1 percent, up 0.8 percentage points from the previous year. II. Lending by financial institutions grew relatively rapidly, with lending rates moving downwards Lending grew relatively rapidly, providing stronger support for the real economy. Multiple measures were taken to encourage financial institutions to enhance credit support for pandemic containment and resumption of work and production. In particular, the role of the loan prime rate (LPR) was brought into play in guiding an overall decline in market interest rates, to stimulate effective demands for credit, and to promote the rapid growth of loans. At the end of March, outstanding loans by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 12.3 percent year on year to RMB166 trillion, up RMB7.4 trillion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of RMB1.3 trillion from the corresponding period of the previous year. Outstanding RMBdenominated loans grew 12.7 percent year on year to RMB160.2 trillion, up RMB7.1 trillion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of RMB1.3 trillion from the corresponding period of 2019. The credit structure was optimized, and loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) increased rapidly. Loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB6 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year increase of RMB1.6 trillion. Industries engaged in pandemic containment or heavily hit by the pandemic received strong credit support. The growth of loans to public health and social services reached 17.1 percent, rising 7.2 percentage points year on year. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector gained 16.7 percent, hitting a new record since April 2011. In particular, loans to the high-tech manufacturing sector rose by 39.2 percent over the same period of the previous year. At the end of March, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 23.6 percent year on year to RMB12.4 trillion, up 4.5 percentage points from the same period of the previous year, thus supporting 27.87 million MSBs, a yearon-year increase of 22.2 percent. The growth of loans to the household sector slowed down to 13.7 percent at the end of March, 1.8 percentage points lower than that at end- 2019.Box 1 Smoother Transmission of Monetary Policy to the Real Economy in China In recent years, following the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) has used banks as the crux of monetary policy transmission. It has flexibly adopted various measures to alleviate the “three constraints” faced by banks in creation of money, namely, liquidity, capital, and interest rates, in an attempt to straighten out the monetary policy transmission mechanism. From 2018 to April 2020, the PBC cut the required reserve ratio (RRR) ten times, releasing long-term funds in the amount of RMB8.4 trillion. The average RRR fell from 14.9 percent from early 2018 to 9.4 percent. During the first two working days after this year’s Spring Festival, beyond expectations the PBC injected RMB1.7 trillion of short-term liquidity, keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. From 2019 to April 2020, banks issued perpetual bonds totaling RMB718.6 billion, effectively replenishing their tier-one capital. Since August 2019, the LPR reform has been successfully promoted, which has removed the implicit floor for loan rates and has activated the demand for loans. With the “three constraints” eased remarkably, the transmission mechanism of China’s monetary policy is much smoother and transmission efficiency has obviously improved. Since the COVID-19 outbreak, the PBC has rolled out a series of monetary policy measures in accordance with the periodic features of pandemic containment and the resumption of work and production. As the transmission efficiency of monetary policy is obviously enhanced, the transmission of various kinds of monetary policy measures to the real economy has been straightened out, which has effectively supported pandemic containment and resumption of work and production, and has alleviated the real difficulties in the real economy. In terms of guiding credit supply, in Q1 the PBC released long-term liquidity in the amount of about RMB2 trillion through RRR cuts and central bank lending. New RMB loans totaled RMB7.1 trillion. For liquidity injection per yuan, there is a corresponding credit growth of 3.5 yuan, which means the amplification ratio is 1:3.5. Deposits are a major component of the broad money (M2), created by credit expansion. The increase in credit supply is accompanied by an increase in deposits by enterprises and residents, which can effectively ease their cash flow pressures and help enterprises alleviate their urgent difficulties in terms of debt repayment, capital turnover, and fund-raising. In terms of reducing the lending rates, enterprise loan rate in March was 4.82 percent, down by 0.3 percentage points from end-2019 and 0.78 percentage points from the peak in 2018 respectively. This drop apparently surpasses those of the one-year MLF and the LPR during the same period. The effect of the policy rate decline is amplified and then transmitted to the real economy, and the LPR reform has effectively played a role in bringing down the lending rates. Since March, in order to offset the impact of COVID-19, central banks in the US and the Eurozone have swiftly cut their interest rates to zero, put forward large-scale asset purchase plans, and even carried out unlimited quantitative easing. In terms of guiding the credit supply, the Federal Reserve released liquidity in the amount of USD1.6 trillion, with loans increasing by USD500 billion. One dollar’s worth of liquidity injection corresponds to credit growth of USD0.3. In Q1, the European Central Bank released liquidity of about EUR540 billion, with loans increasing by EUR230 billion. One euro’s worth of liquidity injection corresponds to credit growth of EUR0.4, which means the reduction ratio is 2.5:1. In terms of reducing lending rates, since 2020 the Federal Reserve has cut interest rates by 1.5 percentage points. The average lending rate for the four major US banks, namely, Citibank, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and JP Morgan, was 4.96 percent in Q1, decreasing 0.17 percentage points from Q4 2019, and obviously lower than the drop in the policy rate. Interest rates for loans granted through the Federal Reserve’s lending facility to small and medium-sized enterprises ranged from 4.8 percent to 6.5 percent and are guaranteed by the government. The European Central Bank cut the policy rate to zero and reduced the targeted longer-term refinancing operations rate by a total of 0.5 percentage points in March and April. The lowest rate may reach –1 percent. However, the interest rate for loans issued by commercial banks to small and micro businesses is 2.17 percent, down by 0.11 percentage points from end-2019. In general, when evaluating policy effectiveness, it is crucial to determine whether aggregate financing support for the real economy has been increased and whether financing costs have been reduced. In comparison, transmission of monetary policy to the real economy is much smoother in China, both in terms of guiding credit supply and reducing lending rates. Banks have fully played their principal role and the market mechanism runs fairly well. Going forward, emphasis will be placed on making the sound monetary policy more flexible and appropriate. Continuous efforts will be made to put forward targeted measures in line with the periodic features of pandemic prevention and control and resumption of work and production and to maintain the transmission efficiency of monetary policy. This will further alleviate the real difficulties facing the real economy and offset the impact of COVID-19. The weighted average interest rates on loans declined, and the corporate lending rates continued to move downwards. In March, the one-year LPR fell by 10 bps from last December to 4.05 percent and the over-five-year LPR fell by 5 bps to 4.75 percent. In March, the weighted average lending rate stood at 5.08 percent, down 0.36 percentage points from last December and 0.61 percentage points year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans reached 5.48 percent, down 0.26 percentage points from last December and 0.56 percentage points year on year; the weighted average bill financing rate posted 2.94 percent, down 0.32 percentage points from last December and 0.70 percentage points year on year; theweighted average individual mortgage rate was 5.60 percent, down 0.02 percentage points from last December and 0.08 percentage points year on year. The corporate lending rate in March was reduced by 0.3 percentage points from end-2019, a drop clearly exceeding that of the LPR, which shows that the LPR reform has had remarkable effects. It has begun to act on strengthening the independent pricing capacities of financial institutions, improving the competitiveness of loan markets, and smoothing the market rate transmission. In mid-April, among ordinary loans, loans with rates lower than 90 percent of the benchmark accounted for 28.9 percent, 3 times that in July 2019 when the LPR reform had not yet kicked off. The implicit floor on loan rates was completely removed and pricing became increasingly market-based. In March, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 72.83 percent, 2.75 percent, and 24.42 percent, respectively. In general, the LPR premium decreased compared with that in last December. Sharp interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve prompted a dip in interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans. In March, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.21 percent and 1.43 percent respectively, down 0.09 percentage points and 0.5 percentage points from last December respectively. The weighted average interest rates of USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 2.19 percent and 1.92 percent respectively, down 0.82 percentage points and 1.09 percentage points respectively from last December.Growth of deposits remained stable. At the end of March, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB206.4 trillion, up 9.2 percent year on year, 0.6 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB201 trillion, up 9.3 percent year on year, 0.6 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD765.4 billion, an increase of USD7.6 billion from the beginning of the year and a deceleration of USD33.7 billion year on year. Fiscal revenues tapered off, while expenditures on public health, such as pandemic containment, were higher. Fiscal deposits decreased by 10.7 percent year on year. III. Money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy increased reasonably At the end of March, outstanding M2 stood at RMB208.1 trillion, up 10.1 percent year on year, an acceleration of 1.4 percentage points from the end of 2019. Outstanding M1 stood at RMB57.5 trillion, a year-on-year growth of 5 percent and 0.6 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding M0 reached RMB8.3 trillion, up 10.8 percent year on year, an increase of 5.4 percentage points from the end of 2019. In Q1 2020, RMB583.3 billion of net cash was injected into the economy, a rise of RMB410 billion year on year. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) reached RMB262.24 trillion at the end of March, up 11.5 percent year on year and an acceleration of 0.8 percentage points over the end of the previous year. In Q1 2020, the incremental AFRE reached RMB11.08 trillion, an increase of RMB2.47 trillion year on year. Growth of the AFRE was characterized by the following features. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-year increase. Second, the drop in entrusted loans narrowed, and undiscounted bankers’ acceptances registered larger month-on-month growth. Third, growth of both corporate bonds and equity financing accelerated. Fourth, government bonds saw a larger year-on-year increase. Fifth, the decline of asset-backed securities by depository financial institutions accelerated from the previous year, while the growth of loans that were written off decelerated. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable, and cross-border RMB transactions grew rapidly Since the beginning of 2020, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions and remained basically stable at a reasonable equilibrium level. With the world economy struck by the pandemic, volatility in the international foreign exchange market swelled dramatically. The RMB exchange rate also fluctuated somewhat, but it showed relatively strong resilience while remaining flexible. The RMB exchange rate against the USD depreciated marginally and the rate against a basket of currencies appreciated. At the end of March, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange-rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 94.06 and 91.35, up 2.92 percent and down 0.5 percent from end-2019, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end-2019 to the end of March, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated by 2.46 percent and 3.13 percent, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation regime commenced to end-March, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated by 35.56 percent and 51.04 percent, respectively. At the end of March, the central parity of the RMB against the USD was 7.0851, a depreciation of 1.54 percent from end-2019. From the launch of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005, the central parity of the RMB against the USD appreciated by 16.82 percent on a cumulative basis. In Q1 2020, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rate against the USD was 5.7 percent, which was greater than the average in 2019, but less than those of the major international currencies and the emerging market currencies in the midst of the global financial market turmoil. In Q1 2020, cross-border receipts and payments in RMB totaled RMB6.1 trillion, up 39 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB3 trillion and RMB3.1 trillion, respectively. RMB cross-border receipts and payments under the current account grew 15 percent over the previous year to RMB1.5 trillion. Specifically, settlement of trade in goods registered RMB1.1 trillion, whereas settlement of trade in services and other items registered a cumulative RMB0.4 trillion. RMB cross-border receipts and payments under the capital account posted RMB4.6 Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q1 2020, amid the complicated situations such as the mounting downward economic pressures both in and out of China caused by the COVID-19 outbreak and the massive volatility in international financial market, the PBC adhered to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, implemented the decisions of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, coordinated pandemic containment with economic and social development, implemented a sound monetary policy in a more flexible and appropriate manner, and adopted preemptive forceful measures. During different phases of battling COVID-19, the PBC innovated policy tools and rolled out measures as needed. By stabilizing expectations, expanding the aggregate amount, adopting targeted measures, emphasizing loan extensions, innovating measures, and focusing on implementation, the PBC effectively supported pandemic control and work and production resumption and cushioned the impact of the outbreak on the economy. All these efforts helped to foster a proper monetary and financial environment for winning the battle against the outbreak and for maintaining stability of employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign and domestic investment, and expectations. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Effectively responding to the COVID-19 disruptions by acting decisively to inject short-term liquidity. In light of the possible large short-term disruptions to the financial market when it reopened after the Spring Festival, on February 2, the final day of the Spring Festival vacation, the PBC announced stronger-than-expected liquidity injection measures to stabilize market expectations. From February 3 to 4, RMB1.7 trillion of short-term repos were conducted through open market operations (OMOs), thus supporting the stable operation of the financial market. Maintaining adequate liquidity at a reasonable level with an appropriate amount and tempo of OMOs. As domestic market sentiments gradually stabilized, the PBC suspended OMOs in succession beginning in mid-February and properly withdrew liquidity when repos matured, guiding liquidity aggregates to return to a normal level. With the approach of end-March, due to a strong demand for funds at the end of the quarter, and somewhat unstable market sentiments caused by the continued liquidity strain of the US dollar in the overseas market, the PBC conducted 7-day repos at the end of the first quarter to shore up market confidence and to guarantee the smooth performance of all types of financial institutions entering the new quarter. The OMO rates moved downward. From the beginning of the year to end-April, the 7-day repo rate dropped 30 basis points to 2.2 percent, and the MLF rate dropped 30 basis points, signaling a strengthened countercyclical adjustment of monetary policy and guiding money market interest rates to move downward. Meanwhile, the financing cost for the real economy was reduced through LPR transmissions. In Q1 2020, money market rates moved steadily with less volatility, remaining within a reasonable range. In Q1 2020, the 7-day repo rate (DR007), which is a funding rate between depository institutions and pledged by government-backed bonds in the interbank market, averaged 2.11 percent, 39 basis points lower than that in Q4 2019. At end-Q1, the DR007 stood at 2.09 percent, 64 and 72 basis points lower than that in the same period of the previous year and end-2019, respectively. Conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations successively. In order to improve the market liquidity of perpetual bonds issued by banks and to support banks to replenish capital through perpetual bond issuances, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times in Q1, once in each month, totaling RMB16 billion. The maturities of all these operations were three months at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent. The bonds swapped with the PBC included not only perpetual bonds issued by large-sized commercial banks and joint-stock commercial banks but also those issued by urban commercial banks, reflecting support by the central bank to small and medium-sized banks to replenish capital through perpetual bond issuances. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. On February 13 and March 26, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB40 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB20 billion, RMB10 billion, and RMB10 billion, respectively, with the balance standing at RMB80 billion as of end-March. The issuance enriched RMB assets with high credit ratings in the offshore market, fostered the sound development of the offshore RMB money market as well as the offshore issues of RMB bonds by other entities, and further promoted the use of RMB as an international currency. II. Conducting well-timed Standing Lending Facility and Medium-term Lending Facility operations Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted to provide short-term liquidity in a timely manner. The demand of locally incorporated financial institutions was met in full amount, with the SLF playing the role of the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, thus promoting the smooth operation of the money market. In Q1 2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB102.7 billion SLF operations, with the balance registering RMB30.6 billion at end-March. The overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates registered 3.35 percent, 3.50 percent, and 3.85 percent respectively at end-March, basically at the same level as those in the previous quarter. On April 10, the abovementioned SLF rates were lowered by 30 basis points, after which the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates registered 3.05 percent, 3.2 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively. The PBC conducted timely MLF operations to guarantee the supply of base money, with a declining rate. In Q1 2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB600 billion of MLF operations, all with a maturity of one year. At end-March, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4290 billion, an increase of RMB600 billion from the beginning of the year. On February 17, the rate of the MLF declined by 10 basis points from the previous operation to 3.15 percent, and on April 15, the rate declined by 20 basis points to 2.95 percent, hence improving the risk appetite and boosting market confidence. The decline of the rate reflected the lower average marginal funding cost of financial institutions, which helps reduce the actual corporate lending rate through the LPR and to promote lower social funding costs. III. Enhancing monetary and credit support to offset the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak To offset the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak, the PBC resolutely followed the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, acted promptly and proactively, and adopted a series of monetary and credit policies to boost domestic demand, to contribute to work and production resumption, and to stabilize employment. First, liquidity remained adequate at a reasonable level. A total amount of RMB1.7 trillion was injected into the market when it reopened after the Spring Festival vacation. In addition to the release of over RMB800 billion through the across-the-board RRR cut of 0.5 percentage points at the beginning of the year, a further RMB550 billion was released in March through the targeted RRR cuts, hence supporting loans of financial institutions in the inclusive finance area. Second, special central bank lending was launched to provide targeted support to key areas and to enterprises in battling COVID-19. In support of winning the fight against the outbreak, the PBC released the Notice on Providing Special Central Bank Lending to Support the Prevention and Control of COVID-19 (Yinfa No.28 [2020]) on January 31, 2020. The aim was to provide low-cost special central bank lending in a total amount of RMB300 billion to major national banks and some locally incorporated banks in 10 key provinces (municipalities), such as Hubei, to support the provision of credit by financial institutions at favorable rates to key enterprises directly engaged in the production, transportation, and sale of key medical supplies and daily necessities in the fight against the virus. Third, an additional RMB500 billion of central bank lending and central bank discount quotas was introduced to support work and production resumption in anorderly manner. The PBC released the Notice of the People’s Bank of China on Ramping up Central Bank Lending and Central Bank Discounts to Support Orderly Work and Production Resumption (Yinfa No.53 [2020]) on February 26, 2020, increasing central bank lending and central bank discount quotas by RMB500 billion, and at the same time reducing the interest rate of central bank lending designated for agricultural sector and small businesses by 0.25 percentage points to 2.5 percent. Therefore, low-cost and inclusive funding support was provided for the orderly resumption of work and production, and debt repayment, capital turnover, the expansion of the funding scale, and other urgent issues confronting enterprises were also addressed. Fourth, another RMB1 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts quotas were introduced to support the economic recovery and development. The PBC released the Notice of the People’s Bank of China on Ramping Up Central Bank Lending and Central Bank Discounts for Small and Medium-sized Banks to Extend Credit Supply Designated for Agricultural Entities, MSBs, and Private Businesses (Yinfa No.93 [2020]) on April 20, 2020. The quotas of central bank lending and central bank discounts were raised by RMB1 trillion, thus enabling the issue of loans at favorable rates to MSMEs in a wider scale and with a wider coverage and supporting a larger credit supply to agriculture, foreign trade, and other sectors that were heavily affected by the outbreak. Fifth, synergy in the financial system was forged and counter-cyclical adjustments were strengthened. Financial institutions were guided to provide differentiated financial services to areas with different COVID-19 alert levels. Major state-owned banks were urged to ramp up support for MSBs in inclusive finance areas, special credit support from policy banks was put in place, and locally incorporated banks were guided to serve local communities effectively Five ministries, with active cooperation between the PBC and the CBIRC, released the Notice on Temporary Loan Deferments of Principal and Interest for Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprises (Yinbaojianfa No.6 [2020]) on March 1, 2020, encouraging financial institutions to allow temporary loan deferments in both principal and interest to qualified MSMEs with temporary liquidity difficulties on the basis of their applications. The repayment date may be extended to June 30.Box 2 The Precise Role of Central Bank Lending and Central Bank Discounts in Combating COVID-19 and Promoting Economic and Social Development In order to coordinate pandemic containment with economic and social development, the PBC has taken the initiative in introducing policy measures. Based on the progress of pandemic containment, the PBC has provided RMB300 billion worth of special central bank lending, RMB500 billion worth of central bank lending and central bank discounts, and RMB1 trillion worth of central bank lending and central bank discounts in succession, with a combined quota of RMB1.8 trillion. The role of central bank lending and central bank discounts in providing targeted liquidity has been brought into full play, vigorously supporting containment of the pandemic, the provision of medical supplies and daily necessities, resumption of work and production, and development of the real economy, especially the MSMEs. 1. The PBC has reasonably mastered the pace and strength of central bank lending and central bank discounts. In response to the pandemic containment and economic and social development, this round of central bank lending and central bank discounts has been employed sequentially with increased policy strength on three occasions since the beginning of this year. In order to win the battle against the pandemic and ensure the provision of medical supplies and daily necessities, on January 31 the PBC provided special central bank lending amounting to RMB300 billion, which was intended to provide low-cost funds to major national banks and selected locally incorporated banks in key provinces including Hubei. These banks were expected to provide credit support at preferential interest rates to major enterprises that participated in the production, transportation, and sales of medical supplies and daily necessities for pandemic containment. With the pandemic preliminarily under control at home, in order to support the orderly resumption of work and production, on February 26 the PBC raised the quota for central bank lending and central bank discounts by a total of RMB500 billion and cut the central bank lending rate on loans supporting the agricultural sector and small businesses by 0.25 percentage points to 2.5 percent. This expanded the coverage and inclusiveness of credit support and made low-cost inclusive funding accessible to more enterprises, thus solving their urgent difficulties in work and production resumption, repayment of debts, turnover of capital, and expansion of funding. In an attempt to shore up the real economy and mitigate the impact of the global COVID-19 outbreak, on April 20 the PBC again increased the quota for central banking lending and central bank discounts by RMB1 trillion, which was to be used to issue preferential loans to the vast number of MSMEs. Financial institutions were encouraged to increase their credit supply to the agro-linked sector, foreign trade, as well as sectors severely hit by the pandemic. This policy has boosted credit support with more strength, wider coverage, and enhanced inclusiveness. 2. Characteristics of central bank lending and central bank discounts since the beginning of this year. The three-time implementation of central bank lending and central bank discounts was featured by broadened coverage, growing inclusiveness, preferential interest rates, and precise requirements on the use of funds. First, the policy coverage was broadened gradually with growing inclusiveness. The RMB300 billion worth of special central bank lending was provided to 9 national banks and 31 locally incorporated banks in 10 provinces (municipalities). List-based management was adopted for major enterprises, which were selected by the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, and the provincial governments of key provinces. It was required that the funds be used for the production and business operations of industries related to pandemic containment. The RMB500 billion and RMB1 trillion worth of central bank lending was provided to over 4,000 locally incorporated financial institutions nationwide. To be specific, RMB500 billion was expected to be provided to more than 500,000 economic entities including enterprises, and RMB1 trillion was to support over 2 million economic entities. Second, preferential interest rates helped bring down the financing costs of the real economy. The interest rate on the RMB300 billion worth of special central bank lending was the one-year loan prime rate (LPR) of the previous month minus 250 basis points (bps), or 1.35 percent at the time. Financial institutions were required to issue loans with the funds from the special central bank lending at an interest rate no higher than the latest one-year LPR minus 100 bps, or 2.85 percent at the time. With a 50 percent discount subsidized by public financing, the actual financing cost of enterprises was ensured to be lower than 1.6 percent. The interest rate on the RMB500 billion worth of central bank lending stood at 2.5 percent, and financial institutions were required to use the funds from the central bank lending and central bank discounts to issue loans at an interest rate no higher than the latest LPR plus 50 bps, or 4.35 percent at the time. In terms of the central bank lending and central bank discounts in the amount of RMB1 trillion, small and medium-sized banks were guided to issue loans with the corresponding funds at a preferential interest rate at about 5.5 percent to the vast number of MSMEs, with the financing cost averaging below 5.5 percent. Third, a reimbursement-based management mode was adopted to guide the use of funds, i.e., issuing loans first and applying for funding later, so as to prevent the misuse of funds. Financial institutions were required to issue loans to enterprises that meet the requirements in the first place, and then to apply to the PBC for central bank lending in the same amount. Therefore, use of funds from central bank lending could be precisely managed. The PBC also required financial institutions to set up an electronic file to closely track and monitor the use of funds in a bid to prevent the misuse of funds. 3. Implementation of the policy has achieved results. The three-time implementation of central bank lending and central bank discounts played a positive role in supporting pandemic containment, resumption of work and production, and economic and social development. The provision of special central bank lending in the amount of RMB300 billion is coming to an end. As of May 5, 9 national banks and locally incorporated banks in 10 provinces (municipalities) had cumulatively issued RMB269.3 billion worth of preferential loans to a total of 7,037 key enterprises, with each enterprise granted preferential loans worth no more than RMB40 million. The weighted average interest rate on the preferential loans posted 2.50 percent, bringing down the actual financing costs of enterprises to approximately 1.25 percent after deducting the subsidy from the public financing, i.e., a 50-percent discount on the interest. At present, the scarcity of medical supplies has been substantially eased and the supply of daily necessities has returned to normal. Of the RMB500 billion worth of central bank lending and central bank discounts, 80 percent have been used to issue loans. As of May 5, preferential loans (including discounts) cumulatively issued by locally incorporated banks amounted to RMB399.6 billion, benefiting 524,000 enterprises (including rural households). To be specific, agro-linked loans, MSB loans for inclusive finance, and bank discounts posted RMB72.6 billion, RMB258.3 billion, and RMB68.7 billion, with the weighted average interest rates standing at 4.38 percent, 4.43 percent, and 3.05 percent respectively. All the above-mentioned interest rates were below the latest oneyear LPR plus 50 bps, thus meeting the regulatory requirements. The policy of the RMB1 trillion worth of central bank lending and central bank discounts has been put in place. The PBC branches and sub-branches have been carrying out the credit supply in an orderly manner. As a continuation of the previous two phases of policy implementation, the third provision of RMB1 trillion is expected to take effect, providing credit support for the real economy and guiding the downward trend of social financing costs. IV. Lowering the required reserve ratio for financial institutions The RRR and excess reserve ratio for financial institutions were cut to support development of the real economy. First, on January 6, 2020, the PBC lowered the RRR for financial institutions (excluding finance companies, financial leasing companies, and auto finance companies) by 0.5 percentage points, releasing over RMB800 billion of long-term funds. Second, on March 16, the PBC implemented a targeted RRR cut for inclusive finance. Based on the assessment on the issuance of loans for inclusive finance in 2019, it granted a preferential RRR cut of 0.5–1.5 percentage points to eligible institutions, and thereby released approximately RMB400 billion in net long-term funds. Moreover, joint-stock commercial banks that received a 0.5-percentage-point RRR cut according to this assessment will enjoy an additional RRR cut of 1 percentage point. The cut was expected to release long-term funds of about RMB150 billion, all of which are required to be used to issue inclusive finance loans. Third, the RRR cut of 1 percentage point for rural commercial banks, rural cooperative banks, village banks, and city commercial banks operating solely within provincial-level administrative regions was carried out in two phases, with a cut of 0.5 percentage points each time, on April 15 and May 15 respectively. About RMB400 billion of long-term funds were freed up by the cuts. Fourth, starting from April 7, the interest rate on excess reserve deposited in the central bank by financial institutions was cut from 0.72 percent to 0.35 percent. All the above-mentioned policies have contributed to boosting financial institutions’ support for MSMEs, bringing down social financing costs, and shoring up the real economy. V. Further improving the macroprudential policy framework The role of the macroprudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and promote the financial supply-side structural reform. In Q1 2020, the central economic work conference required that medium and long-term funding be increased for the manufacturing sector and the difficulties faced by private enterprises and MSMEs be alleviated in terms of accessing affordable funding. In line with these requirements, the PBC further increased the weight of financing for MSBs, private enterprises, and the manufacturing sector in the MPA, in order to guide financial institutions to enhance credit support for related enterprises. A new assessment index, i.e., use of central bank lending, was introduced to encourage locally incorporated banks to better use the newly-added RMB500 billion worth of central bank lending and the central bank discounts quota in issuing preferential MSME loans. The use of funds released from the targeted RRR cuts by joint-stock banks was also incorporated into the MPA, requiring joint-stock banks to further increase credit supply for inclusive finance. The parameter for overall cross-border financing was adjusted in the MPA, bringing down financing costs for the real economy. In a bid to expand the use of foreign capital, facilitate cross-border financing for domestic institutions, and reduce financing costsfor the real economy, on March 11 the PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE), based on the current macroeconomic conditions and the balance of payments, released the Notice on Adjusting the Parameter for Overall Crossborder Financing in the MPA (Yinfa No. 64 [2020]), increasing the parameter from 1 to 1.25. After the policy adjustment, the upper limit on the risk-weighted balance of cross-border financing was raised accordingly. This policy is intended to help domestic institutions, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and private enterprises, make full use of resources and markets at home and abroad, broaden financing channels, alleviate their difficulties in accessing affordable funding, and promote the resumption of work and production, so as to better serve the development of the real economy. VI. Giving full play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments The PBC actively leveraged credit policy to support central bank lending, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policy tools, and to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas in the national economy and weak links, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural residents, as well as poverty alleviation. The Notice of the People’s Bank of China on Leveraging the Special Quota of Central Bank Lending in Support of Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Rural Residents to Facilitate the Expansion of Credit to the Hog Breeding Sector (Yinfa No.56 [2020]) was issued on February 28. The PBC provided RMB20 billion of the special central bank lending quota targeting agriculture, rural areas, and rural residents in an attempt to support credit expansion to the hog breeding sector. Central bank lending to support special poverty alleviation projects was leveraged in a bid to increase credit supply to areas of extreme poverty, including the “three autonomous regions,” i.e., Tibet, four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, and the Tibetan areas in four provinces, and the “three autonomous prefectures,” i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, and to cut down on the financing costs in these areas as well as to promote realization of the goals of targeted poverty alleviation and elimination. In Q1, RMB6.3 billion of central bank lending to support special poverty alleviation projects was issued, with the nationwide outstanding amount of such lending reaching RMB13.9 billion at the end of March. Outstanding central bank lending to support agriculture, rural areas, and rural residents stood at RMB278.4 billion at the end of March. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB370.4 billion and RMB158.2 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB508.2 billion. In Q1, the PBC provided RMB20.2 billion of PSLs to policy and development banks, with the outstanding volume registering RMB3.5576 trillion at the end of March The targeted medium-term lending facility (TMLF) was conducted. The TMLF provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions to expand credit supply to private firms and MSBs at preferential interest rates. In January, the PBC conducted one-year TMLF operations at an interest rate of 3.15 percent, totaling RMB240.5 billion. At the end of March, the outstanding TMLF stood at RMB805.6 billion. VII. Leveraging the structural guidance role of credit policies The PBC fully implemented the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, upheld the supply-side structural reform as the main task, and guided financial institutions to enhance their support to key areas of the national economy and to weak links. By channeling funds to back the real economy, especially the MSMEs, and focusing on employment in key industries and key population, it aimed to be successful in the battle of poverty elimination and in the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. First, financial services were provided to effectively promote targeted poverty alleviation. Efforts were made to reinforce the application of and guidance on policy tools, to provide more financial resources to extremely poor areas, and to maintain rapid expansion in loans and central bank lending to areas of extreme poverty, including the three autonomous regions, i.e., Tibet, the four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, and the Tibetan areas in four provinces and the three autonomous prefectures, i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan. Second, financial services were further strengthened to support rural revitalization. Measures were taken to financially safeguard spring farming, tillage preparation, and hog production, to support financial institutions’ expansion of the scope of collateral, to explore innovation in pledging livestock and poultry and in collateralizing collective assets and shares, in a bid to actively meet the financing needs of a new-type agricultural business entities. Third, financial services were actively provided to support resumption of the work and production of MSMEs. The PBC guided financial institutions to enhance their credit support for MSMEs by using funds from central bank lending and discounts so as to lower comprehensive financing costs. Enterprises with short-term difficulties due to COVID-19 are allowed to temporarily defer payments of principal and interest. Guidelines were given for no irrational recalling, discontinuing, or cutting of loans. Financial institutions were encouraged to increase the credit supply to MSBs with funds collected by issuing special financial bonds to support MSBs. A total of RMB131.5 billion of such bonds was issued in Q1. Fourth, continued efforts were made to enhance financial support for the high-quality development of manufacturing. Commercial banks were guided to provide personalized credit products and financial services based on the features of manufacturing enterprises and to strengthen their financing support for high-tech manufacturing. Fifth, financial support for employment and entrepreneurship was strengthened. With communication and cooperation enhanced among agencies, the PBC studied and improved policies for secured loans, eased criteria for loan applicants, improved loan approval efficiency, and stepped up financial support for the employment and entrepreneurship of special social groups, including veterans, college graduates, and migrant workers returning home for business start-ups. VIII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform The PBC continued to put in place reform measures to lower the real interest rates on corporate loans. Since 2020, application of the LPR was further promoted. The one-year and above-five-year LPR were reported at 4.05 percent and 4.75 percent, respectively in March, and reduced to 3.85 percent and 4.65 percent in April, respectively, 30 basis points and 15 basis points lower than those in December 2019, respectively. Given its indication in direction and guidance, the LPR helps to further lower the real interest rates on loans. In line with market-oriented and law-based principles, the PBC promoted a shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floatingrate loans in an orderly manner, which started from March 1 as scheduled. After basic completion of the shift, the LPR is expected to have a more significant effect on transmitting the lowered LPR to loan interest rates, so that the difficulties and high costs of financing for MSBs will be further alleviated. Box 3 Significant Achievements in the Loan Prime Rate Reform In accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the State Council, on August 17, 2019, the PBC released an announcement on reforming and improving the formation mechanism for the LPR, with the aim of deepening the market-oriented reform of loan interest rates. After a period of continued efforts, significant achievements were made in the LPR reform. First, the market-based LPR better reflects changes in market demand and supply. After the introduction of the LPR in 2013, due to the banks’ inertia in pricing loans and other factors, the spread between the LPR and the benchmark loan interest rate remained relatively constant, with a low degree of market orientation. The LPR reform allowed panel banks to make quotes based on their own actual loan interest rates for prime clients by adding some basis points to the interest rate of the MLF. Determined by market bidding, the interest rate of the MLF reflects the average marginal funding cost of banks. The LPR is more market-based given its formation by adding some basis points to the MLF interest rate. With the gradual decline of the LPR since August 2019, the one-year LPR was reduced by a cumulative 0.4 percentage points, fully reflecting the changes in demand and supply of market funds. Second, the PBC promoted the application of the LPR in the order of “new loans first, outstanding loans second.” Banks’ application of the LPR to the price-setting of new loans was incorporated into the assessment of the MPA, thus propelling banks to use the LPR in setting loan prices in an orderly manner. New loans using the LPR in price-setting accounted for 90 percent of all such loans by the end of December 2019. From January 1, 2020, banks are not allowed to sign new contracts of floating-rate loans with reference to the benchmark loan interest rates. On this basis, replacement of the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans was launched on March 1, 2020 as scheduled, and was orderly advanced in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. Affected by COVID-19, banks, in an attempt to allow clients to process replacements and to avoid the gathering of people, during the early stages handled the business via internet banks and mobile banks, among other online methods. As progress has been achieved in this respect, with the stabilization of COVID-19 containment and future acceleration in the resumption of work and production, replacement of the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans will be stepped up. Third, efficiency of the transmission from monetary policy to loan interest rates was strengthened remarkably. During April 11–20, 2020, new loans with interest rates lower than 0.9 times the original benchmark loan interest rate accounted for 28.9 percent of all new loans, and this proportion more than tripled from its level in July 2019 when the reform has yet started. The implicit floor on loan rates was completely removed. The internal pricing mechanism of banks was further improved, and the market-determined LPR gradually replaced the loan benchmark interest rate as the main reference for internal funds transfer pricing (FTP) of commercial banks. According to statistics, most national banks have embedded the LPR in the FTP curve. Owing to the higher correlation between the FTP and the LPR, the FTP in commercial banks became more market-oriented. Fourth, significant achievements have been made with reform measures to facilitate a reduction of the real loan interest rate. After the LPR reform was launched, with strengthened awareness and capability of price negotiations with enterprises, the loan market became more competitive. Some banks actively provided services for grassroots clients and ramped up their loan support for MSBs, thus notably pushing downward the overall interest rates of corporate loans. In March 2020, the interest rate of general loans (personal mortgage loans excluded) stood at 5.48 percent, 0.62 percentage points lower than that in July 2019 when the reform has yet kicked off and 0.26 percentage points lower than that at the beginning of this year, a remarkably sharper decrease than the fall of the LPR over the same period. Fifth, the LPR reform played an important role in promoting the market-oriented reform of deposit interest rates. As the LPR reform deepened, loan interest rates were aligned with market interest rates and became more market-based. Due to the overall decrease in interest rates in the loan market, bank income from loans declined. To match the income from assets, banks cut the costs of the liabilities as needed, with lower incentives to attract deposits at high interest rates, thus guiding the decline of deposit rates. In fact, changes have taken place in the deposit rates as some banks have actively lowered the rates and rates on market-priced money market funds as well as other quasideposit products trended downwards. Hence, the deposit rates and market interest rates became increasingly aligned, i.e., shifting away from the existing two-track interest rate system into a unified system. The reform of interest rates in the loan market enabled the deposit rates to effectively become more market-oriented. Going forward, the PBC will continue to deepen the LPR reform and release its potentials. Further efforts will be made to smooth the transmission channel from market interest rates to loan interest rates, facilitate the reduction of real loan interest rates, and support work and production resumption and economic and social development. Meanwhile, the PBC will promote the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans in an orderly manner, strengthen its monitoring of the progress of the shift, and integrate the shift of outstanding corporate loans in financial institutions into the MPA and the eligibility prudential assessments, which is expected to be basically completed by the end of August. IX. Improving the market-oriented RMB exchange rate regime The PBC continued to advance the market-oriented exchange rate reform and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of the exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In the meantime, the PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q1 2020, the highest and lowest CNY central parities were 6.8606 and 7.1052 against the USD, respectively. During the 58 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 27 days and depreciated on 31 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 0.45 percent (309 bps) and 0.76 percent (530 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate against other major international currencies floated two-ways with both appreciations and depreciations. At end-March, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar and the Japanese yen had depreciated 1.54 percent and 2.22 percent respectively from end-2019, while the RMB had appreciated 0.09 percent and 4.46 percent respectively against the euro and the pound. From the RMB exchange rate regime reform in 2005 to end-March 2020, the RMB against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen appreciated by a cumulative total of 16.82 percent, 28.24 percent, and 11.47 percent respectively. Direct RMB trading was buoyant on the interbank foreign exchange market with steady liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs for market participants and facilitate bilateral trade and investment. X. Promoting resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner and deepening the reforms of financial institutions Risk resolution of Baoshang Bank (BSB) was promoted in a prudent and orderly manner. Since the takeover of BSB due to its severe credit risk, steady progress has been made by the joint efforts of all relevant parties. On April 30, BSB issued an announcement that part of its businesses, assets, and liabilities would be transferred to Mengshang Bank (MSB) and Huishang Bank. MSB was scheduled to open for business on May 6. On balance, this swift and decisive action has avoided further deterioration of the bank’s risks, ensured maximum protection of the legitimate rights and interests of its depositors and clients, and maintained overall social stability. Meanwhile, in line with the laws and regulations, it has put an end to the practice of de facto guaranteed repayments. During this entire process, the PBC has fully played its role as “lender of last resort”, which has effectively contained the risks of contagion from BSB to other small and medium-sized banks and thus has succeeded in defending the bottom line of no systemic risks. Phased achievements were made in disposing of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions. The PBC actively defused hidden risks in some city commercial banks, rural commercial banks, and rural credit cooperatives over the years, and ensured maximum protection of the legitimate rights and interests of creditors. It promoted provincial-level governments to formulate risk disposal plans for small and mediumsized financial institutions, according to the principle of “one province, one policy.” The reform and restructuring plan of Hengfeng Bank was successfully put in place and phased progress was made in the reform and restructuring of Bank of Jinzhou. Steady progress was made in the reform of development and policy financial institutions. Implementation of the reform plans for development and policy financial institutions was comprehensively promoted. The PBC, together with members of the Reform Working Group, promoted implementation of the reform measures in an orderly manner, such as establishing and enhancing the boards of directors, improving the governance structure, and redefining the scope of business. Currently, boards of directors of development and policy financial institutions have been established and are functioning effectively. The PBC will continue to guide policy financial institutions to stick to their responsibilities and business scope and to strengthen support for key areas and weak links, while strengthening risk prevention and control so as to better serve national development strategies. XI. Deepening the reforms of foreign exchange administration Foreign-exchange administration for trade in goods was further optimized. First, business processes of foreign exchange receipts and payments for imports of supplies necessary for battling COVID-19 were simplified. From January 27 to March 31, a total of 4,551 foreign exchange receipts and payments under trade in goods were expedited across the country through the green channel, totaling USD1.03 billion. Second, the pilot program of facilitating foreign exchange receipts and payments under trade in goods was expanded. By end-Q1 2020, the pilot programs of facilitating foreign exchange receipts and payments under trade in goods and in services were carried out in eight and two provinces (municipalities) across the nation, respectively. There were 41 pilot banks and 206 enterprises. A total of 73,000 foreign exchange receipts and payments were processed under trade in goods and services, worth a total USD57.2 billion. Third, enterprises across the nation succeeded in reporting online 852,000 foreign exchange transactions under trade in goods. Fourth, requirements on foreign exchange receipts and payments under trade in goods were simplified for small and micro businesses engaged in cross-border e-commerce. Meanwhile, these enterprises were exempt from directory registration. Fifth, electronic filing of taxation was continuously promoted in the area of foreign exchange payments for trade in services. At end-Q1 2020, 32,000 electronic taxation forms were filed, involving foreign exchange payments worth USD55.7 billion and bringing benefits to 12,600 enterprises. Cross-border financing and investment were further facilitated. First, requirements on presenting in advance authenticity-verifying documents were temporarily eased for settlements and payments of foreign exchange receipts under the capital account with respect to disease containment. From January 27 to March 27, a total of 4,895 facilitated payments of foreign exchange receipts under the capital account were processed across the nation, worth about USD900 million. Second, cross-border financing related to pandemic containment was facilitated and achieved. The external debt quota may be lifted for those enterprises which have genuine demand, and they can apply online for external debt registration. From January 27 to March 27, 742 cases of external debt registration were processed online, amounting to USD37 billion. Third, the pilot program of external debt facilitation was expanded and high-tech companies were supported to raise funds overseas. The scope of the pilot was expanded from Beijing Zhongguancun National Self-dependent Innovation Demonstration Zone to places such as Shanghai, Hubei, Guangdong, and Shenzhen, and eligible high-tech companies have been allowed to borrow funds voluntarily within a certain quota. Stability in the foreign exchange market was maintained. Priority was given to conducting monitoring and analysis of potential risks of cross-border capital flows incurred by COVID-19. Emphasis was placed on clue screening of illegal financial activities, such as underground banks, cross-border gambling, and illegal online foreign exchange trading. Forward-looking research was actively promoted on a cross-border anti-money-laundering mechanism, macro and micro regulation on banks, and on the foreign exchange wholesale market. In Q1, a total of 176 cases violating the laws and regulations of foreign exchange administration were handled, with the total fines amounting to RMB140 million. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In Q1 2020, affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the financial market experienced increased volatility. Capital prices in the money market dropped significantly with an overall easing of the supply of liquidity. The total volume of bond issuances saw yearon-year growth, with a rapid fall in bond yields. The stock market generally went up prior declining, with the major indexes sliding. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates remained at a low level and market transactions were active Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level, and money market interest rates remained at a low level. In March 2020, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending and pledged repos posted 1.40 percent and 1.44 percent, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate for governmentbacked bond repos among depository institutions posted 1.29 percent, 15 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. At end-March, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 1.61 percent and 2.15 percent, respectively. The market saw active repo transactions and interbank lending. In Q1 2020, the trading volume of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB202.3 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.4 trillion and a year-on-year increase of 4.6 percent. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending reached RMB32.4 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB548.6 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 19.7 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos and overnight lending accounted for 82.8 percent and 89 percent, respectively, of the total turnover in bond repos and interbank lending, decreasing 1.4 percentage points and 2.7 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 11.1 percent year on year to RMB62.9 trillion.The interbank CD and negotiable CD businesses witnessed orderly development. In Q1 2020, a total of 6,930 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB4.1 trillion. The trading volume on the secondary market totaled RMB40.4 trillion. By end-March, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB10.6 trillion. In Q1 2020, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.53 percent, 1 basis point higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 18,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB3.6 trillion and with a decrease of RMB0.9 trillion year on year. Interest rate swaps were active. In Q1 2020, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 61,000 transactions, increasing 23 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB4.3 trillion, an increase of 12 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB2.5 trillion, accounting for 59 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 79.3 percent and 18.7 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q1 2020, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR amounted to 466 transactions with RMB75.5 billion of the notional principal. The LPR interest rate option business was officially launched. On March 23, the LPR interest rate option business on the interbank market made its debut and attracted active participation by market players, covering large commercial banks, joint-stock commercial banks, city commercial banks, rural commercial banks, foreign-funded banks, securities companies, and so forth. At end-March, a total of 172 interest rate option transactions were concluded, adding up to RMB15.53 billion. Specifically, 89 were LPR interest rate swap transactions and 83 were LPR interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB7.34 billion and RMB8.19 billion, respectively. 2. The coupon rate of bonds generally declined, while transactions and the issuance of cash bonds expandedThe government bond yield curve moved downward. At end-March, the yields of 10- year and 1-year government bonds posted 2.55 percent and 1.69 percent, respectively, decreasing by 60 basis points and 73 basis points, respectively, from the beginning of 2020. The coupon rates of all types of bonds fell. The coupon rate of 10-year government bonds issued in March 2020 was 3.13 percent, 12 basis points lower than the rate in March 2019. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by China Development Bank was 2.89 percent, 76 basis points lower than the rate in March 2019. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated nonfinancial enterprises was 2.89 percent, 53 basis points lower than the rate in March 2019. The volume of cash bond transactions continued to grow. In Q1 2020, the volume of cash bond trading on the interbank market posted RMB48.8 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB827.0 billion and an increase of 14.6 percent year on year. The volume of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB3.4 trillion, registering an increase of 78.1 percent year on year. The volume of bond issuances has seen year-on-year growth and the share of short-term debenture bond issuances has hit a record high in recent years. In Q1 2020, the cumulative volume of bond issuances totaled RMB12.1 trillion, RMB1.8 trillion morethan that in Q1 2019. The issuance of debenture bonds surged remarkably, among which RMB1485.3 billion with a maturity of less than one year was issued, accounting for 43 percent of all debenture bond issuances. At end-March, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB102.9 trillion, an increase of 4 percent compared to end-2019.3. Bill financing continued to rise, and interest rates in the bill market remained relatively stable The bill acceptance business continued to grow. In Q1 2020, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB6.0 trillion, rising 12.1 percent year on year. At end-March, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB13.4 trillion, increasing 10.6 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances continued to expand steadily by RMB696.2 billion from the beginning of the year. Of the outstanding bankers' acceptances, 70.2 percent were issued by MSMEs. Bill financing continued to expand, while interest rates moved downwards slightly. In Q1 2020, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB10.9 trillion, growing 3.1 percent year on year. At end-March, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.2 trillion, up 25.6 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.1 percent of total outstanding loans, 0.5 percentage points higher than the percentage during the same period of the previous year. In Q1 2020, interest rates in the bill market moved downwards slightly. 4. Stock indices dropped, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year on year Stock indices declined in a much narrower way compared to other stock markets. At end-March, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 2,750 points, decreasing 9.8 percent from end-2019. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 9,962 points, decreasing 4.5 percent from end-2019. The turnover on the stock markets increased significantly. In Q1 2020, the combined turnover of Shanghai Stock Exchange and Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB50 trillion and the average daily turnover was RMB862.1 billion, with an increase of 46.7 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised expanded year on year. In Q1 2020, a cumulative RMB140.3 billion was raised on the stock market, increasing 39.6 percent year on year. 5. Growth of premium income slowed down, while growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In Q1 2020, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB1.7 trillion, with a year-on-year increase of 2.3 percent, 9.9 percentage points lower than the growth rate in 2019. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB303.1 billion, with a year-onyear decrease of 8.7 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claim and benefit payments decreased 11.7 percent year on year, while total life insurance claim and benefit payments fell 6.4 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-March, total assets in the insurance industry increased 13.7 percent year on year to RMB21.7 trillion, an acceleration of 1.5 percentage points from end-2019. Specifically, bank deposits increased 9.3 percent year on year and investment-linked assets expanded 14.7 percent year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions fell year on year In Q1 2020, turnover of spot RMB/foreign-exchange transactions registered USD1.7 trillion, a decrease of 15.07 percent year on year. Turnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD3.3 trillion, a decrease of 27.8 percent year on year. Specifically, overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD1.8 trillion, accounting for 56.2 percent of the total swap turnover. Turnover in the RMB/foreign exchange forward market totaled USD26.9 billion, rising 40.3 percent year on year. Turnover in foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD116.9 billion, rising 47 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 52.3 percent of the total market share. Participants on the foreign exchange market expanded further. At end-March, there were 716 members on the foreign exchange spot market, 249 members on the foreign exchange forward market, 243 members on the foreign exchange swap market, 201 members on the currency swap market, and 151 members on the foreign exchange options market. There were 32 market makers on the spot market and 27 market makers on the forward and swap markets.7. The gold market operated steadily with an overall rise in prices In Q1 2020, international gold prices closed at USD1,608.95 per ounce, representing a gain of 5.64 percent from end-2019. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB364.27 per gram, increasing 6.89 percent from end-2019. In Q1 2020, the volume of gold traded on Shanghai Gold Exchange was 18,000 tons, representing a gain of 24 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB6.4 trillion, increasing 54.08 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market In February 2020, China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the PBC, and China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) jointly issued a notice enabling eligible pilot commercial banks and insurance institutions capable of investment management, based on the principle of compliance, controllable risk, and sustainable business, to participate in the trade of treasury bond futures on China Financial Futures Exchange (CFFEX). In this way, the structure of treasury bond futures investors will be enriched and the stable and orderly development of the market will be promoted. The first batch of pilot institutions included Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), Agricultural Bank of China (ABC), Bank of China (BOC), China Construction Bank (CCB), and Bank of Communications (BOCOM). 2. Improving institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures industry The capability of the capital market to serve the real economy was further enhanced. First, in February the CSRC released three refinancing arrangements for listed companies, including the Decision on Revising the “Measures for the Administration of Securities Issuances by Listed Companies”. The arrangements relaxed the refinancing limitation of companies listed on the ChiNext Market. Second, in March, the CSRC released the Special Provisions on Shareholding Reductions by Venture Capital Fund Shareholders of Listed Companies after revision, which tapped into the potential of venture capital funds to support the entrepreneurship and innovation of enterprises. Third, in March, the CSRC released the Guidelines for the Evaluation of Science and Technology Innovation Attributes (for Trial Implementation), which made it more operable for the Exchange to evaluate the science and technology innovation attributes of companies listed on the STAR market. Regulation of securities institutions was further improved. For one thing, in January the SCRC released the Provisions on the Calculation Basis for Risk Control Indicators of Securities Companies, which further improved the system of risk control indicators of securities companies. For another, in March the CSRC decided to lower the payment ratio of securities companies in securities investor protection funds in 2019 and 2020, so as to lower their operating costs and strengthen support for the real economy. 3. Improving institutional arrangements in the insurance market Development of commercial insurance in the field of social services was bolstered. On January 23, the CBIRC, together with 12 other ministries and commissions, issued the Opinion on Promoting the Development of Commercial Insurance in the Field of Social Services, which introduced 11 policies and measures in five respects to help commercial insurance play a better role in the field of social services. The business of insurance asset management products was regulated in an all-round way. On March 18, the CBIRC released the Interim Measures for the Regulation of Insurance Asset Management Products, which specified the positioning, form, and issuance mechanism of asset management products, made clear the due responsibilities of the issuers, and implemented active supervision. Reform of accident insurance was accelerated. On January 17, the CBIRC released the Opinions on Accelerating the Reform of Accident Insurance, in order to rectify price distortions in accident insurance. 4. Further opening up the bond market In March 2020, under the guidance of the PBC, relevant financial infrastructures improved their transaction settlement arrangements and launched services such as rolling settlement and flexible settlement cycles, which met the diversified needs of foreign institutional investors and further facilitated their operations. 5. Enhancing coordinated supervision of the financial infrastructure After being deliberated and passed at the tenth meeting of the Central Committee for Deepening Overall Reform, the Work Plan on Coordinating Supervision over Financial Infrastructures was co-issued by the PBC, NDRC, MOF, CBIRC, CSRC, and SAFE. The work plan aims to further improve the coordinated supervision and construction planning of the financial infrastructure and to enhance capability to serve the real economy and to forestall financial risks. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments 1. The global economy is set to enter a recession As the global pandemic outbreak continues, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised downward its global growth forecast several times since 2020, according to which the per capita income in over 170 countries out of its 189 members will see negative growth. Risks are tilted to the downside in the advanced economies. During the seven weeks ending May 2, more than 33 million Americans filed first-time unemployment claims, and the jobless rate surged to 14.7 percent in April. Since the pandemic broke out in countries such as Italy, France, and Germany in February 2020, the extent of the economic slowdown in the euro area has sparked concerns. Growth in Japan was already on the verge of recession prior to the outbreak of COVID-19, and the pandemic will precipitate an economic downturn. The emerging market economies could see a fall in growth across the board. Due to the economic fallout of COVID-19, growth in the emerging market economies will probably continue to drop. The IMF projected that the emerging market economies as a whole would grow –1.0 percent in 2020, 4.7 percentage points slower than the growth of 3.7 percent in 2019. 2. The major central banks began a fresh round of monetary easing Central banks around the globe cut rates aggressively. Central banks in the advanced economies, such as the US Fed and the Bank of England (BOE), reduced rates substantially to address the financial turbulence caused by COVID-19 and to boost market confidence. In March, the US Fed and the BOE each joined the ranks of zero interest rates as they lowered rates twice by a total of 150 basis points (bps) and 65 bps, respectively. Central banks in the advanced economies either resumed or scaled up quantitative easing (QE). In Q1, the US Fed expanded its balance sheet considerably as it announced it would buy assets as necessary. The European Central Bank (ECB) first increased QE by EUR120 billion, and then announced that it would buy an additional EUR750 billion in assets by year-end. The Bank of Japan (BOJ) increased the size of asset purchased by nearly JPY8 trillion, and the BOE increased the size of assets purchased by GBP200 billion to GBP645 billion. Major central banks strengthened liquidity support by adopting a number of targeted facilities. The Fed introduced several emergency liquidity facilities, including the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility. The ECB launched additional longer-term refinancing operations, the BOE created the COVID Corporate Financing Facility to support liquidity among larger firms and the Term Funding Scheme for small and medium-sized enterprises, and the BOJ put in place Special Funds-Supplying Operations for distressed businesses. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, supply and demand shocks resulting from the fast spread of COVID-19 have put the global economy on a recession trajectory for the short term. From the supply side, the pandemic has spread to most key parts of the global value chain, with production coming to a grinding halt and industrial chains disrupted. From the demand side, the pandemic has directly led to diminishing income for households and businesses, while fears and uncertainties over the pandemic have further dented market confidence, resulting in weaker consumption and investment. Second, the global economy is fraught with uncertainties as how the pandemic will develop remains unclear and as the intensity of policy responses varies from country to country. Although countries around the world have adopted a slew of measures to address the fallout from COVID-19, their policy intensity and effectiveness are different. A second wave of infection may come given the absence of strong international coordination, which may cause the economies to alternate between pausing and reopening. Third, pockets of financial risks accumulated at a faster pace, which warrants attention. The real economy has suffered from the COVID-19 pandemic. The credit risk and market risk have been growing in the corporate sector and financing institutions. If some countries respond late or inappropriately, financial risks may coincide with real economic risks. Fourth, the major economies have less room for policy maneuver. The major central banks have already cut policy rates to near zero, while much earlier the ECB and the BOJ had already introduced a negative interest rate policy. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In Q1 2020, COVID-19 dealt an unprecedented blow to China’s economic and social development. Despite the pandemic, China’s economy showed great resilience, the sound momentum of pandemic containment further consolidated, and work and production resumption was gradually approaching or had already reached a normal level. The production of livelihood-related fundamental industries and major products grew steadily, people’s basic livelihood was well-guaranteed, and overall economic and social development was stable. According to preliminary statistics, the GDP in Q1 2020 dropped by 6.8 percent year on year, while the CPI rose by 4.9 percent year on year. Box 4 Analysis of the Economic Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the World and on China and the Policy Responses Since the beginning of 2020, the COVID-19 has spread across the world with confirmed cases in over 200 countries and regions. As of May 5, the aggregate number of confirmed cases exceeded 3.7 million and the number of deaths exceeded 250,000. Given the impact of the pandemic, the IMF revised its forecast for 2020 global GDP growth down by 6.3 percentage points, from 3.3 percent in January to –3 percent, which would mark the worst economic recession since the Great Depression in the 1930s. The World Bank also predicted that GDP growth in the East Asia-Pacific region would slow down from 5.8 percent in 2019 to 2.1 percent in 2020. The pandemic has had a great impact on the global economy. First of all, countries have adopted lockdowns, business closures, and isolation measures, putting a halt to economic activities other than the production of essential goods and bringing the economies to a standstill. Second, international trade has shrunk significantly, reducing potential growth of the global economy. The World Trade Organization (WTO) predicted that global trade would shrink by 13 percent to 32 percent this year due to the pandemic and might be worse than that during the 2008 global financial crisis. Meanwhile, the global economic slowdown induced by the pandemic will further undermine external demand and exert large pressures on the trade sector. Third, most industries have gone into a temporary halt, taking a toll on the key links in the global supply chain. In recent decades, integrated global production has become a major source of world economic growth. As a result, the stagnation of economic activities in one country can easily weaken or even disrupt the global supply chain. Fourth, the pandemic has also changed the expectations of global investors, and black swan events in the international financial market have occurred frequently. In March, the US stock market plunged, triggering the circuit breaker four times. On April 20, international crude oil futures settled at a negative price for the first time in history. Financial risks have coincided with sluggishness in the real economy. The pandemic has also hit China’s economic and social development in an unprecedented manner. First, the production and operation of enterprises have been impacted. The extension of the Spring Festival holiday and the delay in resumption of work have reduced the effective working days. The traffic restrictions in some provinces and cities have also interrupted the flow of personnel and materials necessary for production. The relevant losses have been reflected in GDP growth in Q1 2020. Second, the demand-side indicators have decelerated year on year. Since the beginning of this year, consumer spending on retail, catering, and tourism has declined significantly. The pandemic has also profoundly influenced the behavior of economic entities. In particular, consumers may reduce consumption in shopping malls, theaters, and other crowded places for a long time. Third, external risks will continue to impact the domestic economy. It is difficult to improve the dampened international trade in the short term, and external demand may continue to decline, which will drag down China's economic growth further. Nonetheless, China’s overall economic fundamentals of stable growth, good long-term momentum, and high-quality development remain intact. According to the decisions and arrangement of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and the State Council, all sectors and regions have taken multipronged measures to comprehensively promote the resumption of work and production amid routine pandemic containment and to restore normal economic and social order. By the end of Q1 2020, China's industrial enterprises above a designated size had come close to full-scale resumption, restaurants, hotels and other enterprises in many regions had resumed business, and transportation and logistics were gradually returning to normal. Economic data have improved since March. However, the following risks merit attention. First, the duration and negative impact of the pandemic might exceed expectations. The pandemic is still serious in advanced countries like Europe and the US, and the effect of efforts to restart the economy remains to be seen. The number of newly confirmed cases is rising rapidly in some developing economies and agricultural product–exporting countries, and the future development of the pandemic is highly uncertain. Second, close attention should be paid to the spillovers of the highly accommodative unconventional monetary and fiscal policies in the major economies. Monetary and fiscal policies can only counteract the negative impact of the pandemic. The future global economic recovery and financial development still depend on progress in pandemic containment. Meanwhile, the negative effects of unconventional policies will play out gradually. Third, the domestic economy still faces many challenges. Enterprises, especially small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), have been hit hard by the pandemic. There is increasing pressure on employment and social security. More coordination is needed to resume work and production along the industrial chain. Continuous efforts should be made to guarantee supply of the main agricultural byproducts and to stabilize their prices. Fourth, there are also uncertainties in China's balance of payments and cross-border capital flows. On the one hand, given that the major central banks have significantly loosened monetary policy and China has taken the lead in pandemic containment as well as production resumption, RMB assets, which provide higher returns and relative security, may attract capital inflows. On the other hand, the continuous weakening of external demand and the decline in investor risk appetite may also reduce exports and cause capital outflows. Going forward, the sound monetary policy should be more flexible and appropriate whereby the PBC will keep a good grasp in the intensity, pace, and focus of the new polices, skillfully handle the relationship between stabilizing growth, protecting employment, restructuring the economy, preventing risks, and controlling inflation, ensure that the growth of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) is basically in line with and slightly higher than nominal GDP growth, and support highquality economic development with appropriate money growth. The PBC will continue to maintain the two-way floating flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and stabilize expectations through multiple channels. In addition, the PBC will strengthen international policy coordination and effectively contain the impact of the pandemic. Furthermore, the PBC will adhere to bottom-line thinking, remain vigilant against potential external risks, prepare policies proactively, and promote stability in the national economy. 1. Consumption decreased, investment slowed down, and imports and exports declined Residents’ income in nominal terms grew slightly, consumption decreased, and sales of daily necessities and online retail sales of physical goods witnessed fast growth. In Q1 2020, per capita disposable income edged up by 0.8 percent in nominal terms and dropped by 3.9 percent in real terms year on year. The income distribution structure continued to improve, with the per capita income of rural residents continuing to grow at a faster pace than that of urban residents. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC, in Q1 2020 22.0 percent of consumers were inclined to “consume more,” down 6.0 percentage points and 3.8 percentage points respectively from Q4 2019 and Q1 2019. In Q1 2020, total retail consumer goods declined by 19.0 percent year on year, among which that in March dropped by 15.8 percent year on year, a deceleration of 4.7 percentage points from that in January and February. The retail sales of grain oil and food, beverages, and Chinese and western medicines by enterprises above a designated size grew by 12.6 percent, 4.1 percent, and 2.9 percent respectively. Online retail sales of physical goods witnessed a year-on-year growth of 5.9 percent. Investment activities slowed down, with a relatively smaller decline of investment in the high-tech and health industries. In Q1 2020, fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households) decreased by 16.1 percent year on year, a deceleration of 8.4 percentage points from those from January to February. Divided by investment areas, investment in the infrastructure, manufacturing, and real estate industries fell by 19.7 percent, 25.2 percent, and 7.7 percent year on year respectively, a deceleration of 10.6 percentage points, 6.3 percentage points, and 8.6 percentage points from those in January and February respectively. Investment in high-tech industry dropped by 12.1 percent, 4.0 percentage points lower than total investment, while investment in the health industry edged down by 0.9 percent, 15.2 percentage points lower than total investment. Imports and exports shrank, but the trade structure continued to improve. In Q1 2020, imports and exports dropped by 6.4 percent year on year. Specifically, exports declined by 11.4 percent, while imports edged down by 0.7 percent, with the trade surplus at RMB98.3 billion. The trade structure continued to be optimized, and export goods moved further up the value chain. Imports and exports of general trade accounted for 60.0 percent of total imports and exports, 0.4 percentage points higher than that in Q1 2019. The layout of the international market became more diversified. Exports to the US and the EU dropped by 23.6 percent and 14.2 percent respectively, while exports to ASEAN and countries along the Belt and Road grew 2.4 percent and decreased 1.8 percent respectively, 13.8 percentage points and 9.6 percentage points higher than that of total exports. Foreign direct investment continued to be concentrated in the high-tech services industry. In Q1 2020, actually utilized foreign investment decreased by 10.8 percent year on year to RMB216.2 billion. Actually-utilized foreign investment in the high-tech services industry grew by 15.5 percent year on year, accounting for 29.9 percent of that in the services sector. Specifically, information services, electronic commerce services, and professional technology services rose by 28.5 percent, 62.4 percent, and 95 percent year on year respectively. 2. Agricultural production was generally stable, whereas industrial production declined In Q1 2020, the value-added of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries decreased by 3.2 percent, 9.6 percent, and 5.2 percent respectively, accounting for 4.9 percent, 35.7 percent, and 59.4 percent of GDP respectively. Agricultural production was generally stable. In Q1 2020, the value-added of agriculture (the planting industry) grew by 3.5 percent year on year. The output of poultry eggs and milk grew by 4.3 percent and 4.6 percent respectively, and that of pork, beef, mutton, and poultry totaled 18.13 million tons. The hog capacity continued to recover. At end-Q1 2020, hog in stock grew by 3.5 percent from end-Q4 2019 to 321.20 million, among which breeding sows in stock grew by 9.8 percent to 33.81 million. Industrial production declined. In Q1 2020, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) decreased by 8.4 percent year on year, among which that in March declined by 1.1 percent year on year, a deceleration of 12.4 percentage points from that in January and February. In March, industrial output was approaching that of March 2019. Year-on-year growth of the high-tech manufacturing industries reached 8.9 percent, 17.3 percentage points higher than that of the IEDS. In Q1 2020, total profits of the IEDS dropped by 36.7 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1.6 percentage points from that in January and February. According to a survey conducted in Q1 2020 by the PBC on 5,000 entrepreneurs, the Business Climate Index posted 30.3 percent, down 25.2 percentage points and 24.5 percentage points from Q4 2019 and Q1 2019 respectively. The Profitability index registered 22.3 percent, down 35 percentage points and 30 percentage points from Q4 2019 and Q1 2019, respectively. Growth of the servicessector slowed down, while that of the emerging servicesindustry showed sound momentum. In Q1 2020, the value-added of information communications, software, and the information technology services industry grew by 13.2 percent year on year, and that of the financial industry increased by 6.0 percent year on year. In March, the Index of Service Production (ISP) dropped by 9.1 percent year on year, a deceleration of 3.9 percentage points from that in January and February. The Commercial Activities Index for the services industry registered 51.8 percent, up 21.7 percentage points from the previous month. In terms of market expectations, the Expected Business Activities Index for the services industry reached 56.8 percent, up 17.1 percentage points from the previous month, demonstrating the enterprises’ strengthened confidence in the market. 3. Consumer prices witnessed a structural rise, and producer prices declined amidst stability Consumer prices went up structurally, with growth witnessing a month-on-month decline. In Q1 2020, the CPI rose by 4.9 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.7 percentage points from the previous quarter, with growth of the CPI in January, February, and March registering 5.4 percent, 5.2 percent, and 4.3 percent, respectively. Specifically, the price of pork rose rapidly, which drove up food prices to a high level. Food prices grew by 20.3 percent year on year, an acceleration of 3 percentage points from the previous year. Non-food prices edged up steadily by 1.1 percent year on year, which was on par with the previous quarter. The growth of consumer goods prices accelerated, while growth of services decelerated. Producer prices continued to decrease. In Q1 2020, the Producer Price Index (PPI) edged down by 0.6 percent year on year, decelerating 0.6 percentage points compared with the previous quarter. The PPI increased by 0.1 percent in January, and fell by 0.4 percent and 1.5 percent respectively in February and March. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) declined by 0.8 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1.1 percentage points from the previous quarter. The Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC edged down by 0.1 percent year on year, with growth registering 1.0 percent, 0.3 percent, and –1.4 percent respectively in January, February, and March, posting a month-on-month deceleration. 4. Fiscal expenditures decreased, and the employment situation was generally stable In Q1 2020, revenue in the national general public budget totaled RMB4.5984 trillion, down 14.3 percent year on year, registering a deceleration of 18.1 percentage points compared with 2019. Specifically, tax revenue dropped by 16.4 percent year on year, while non-tax revenue edged up by 0.1 percent year on year. The domestic value-added and consumption tax fell by 23.6 percent and 16.4 percent year on year respectively. The corporate income tax saw a year-on-year decrease of 12.8 percent, while the personal income tax grew by 3.5 percent year on year. Fiscal expenditures slowed down. In Q1 2020, expenditures in the national general public budget hit RMB5.5284 trillion, down 5.7 percent year on year, a deceleration of 13.8 percentage points from 2019. In terms of the structure, expenditures related to medical health and social security were stable. Expenditures for the health industry grew by 4.8 percent year on year, whereas those for social security and employment fell by 0.7 percent year on year. Budgetary revenue from nationwide government-managed funds went down 12 percent year on year. Specifically, revenue from land sales dropped by 7.9 percent year on year. Budgetary expenditures from nationwide government-managed funds increased by 4.6 percent year on year. The employment situation remained stable. In Q1 2020, a total of 2.29 million new jobs were created in the urban areas. In March, the surveyed unemployment rate in the urban areas was 5.9 percent, up 0.7 percentage points and down 0.3 percentage points compared with that in December 2019 and February 2020 respectively. The surveyed unemployment rate in the urban areas of 31 metropolises stood at 5.7 percent, which was on par with the previous month. In March, the average working time per week of employeesin enterprises was 44.8 hours, 4.6 hours more than that in the previous month. Employment sentiment was falling. According to the Survey of Urban Depositors conducted by the PBC in Q1 2020, the Employment Sentiment Index posted 37.7 percent, down 6.8 percentage points and 8.1 percentage points compared with that in Q4 2019 and Q1 2019 respectively, while the Employment Expectation Index for Q2 2020 was 47.3 percent, down 4.6 percentage points and 6.4 percentage points quarter on quarter and year on year, respectively. 5. The balance of payments and external debt The balance of payments remained basically in equilibrium. According to preliminary data, China’s current account deficit stood at USD29.7 billion in Q1. To be specific, the surplus in trade of goods was USD26.4 billion, whereas the deficit in trade of services was USD47 billion. Under the capital and financial account, the surplus in direct investments reached USD14.9 billion. At end-March, foreign-exchange reserves registered USD3.0606 trillion, a decrease of USD47.3 billion, or 1.5 percent, from the beginning of 2020. As of end-2019, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.0573 trillion. Among this, the short-term external debt balance was USD1.2053 trillion, accounting for 59 percent of the total external debt balance. 6. Analysis by sector 6.1 The real estate sector In Q1 2020, nationwide housing prices were generally stable. Due to the impact of COVID-19, housing sales and investments in real estate development declined, but picked up gradually from March. Growth of real estate loans continued to moderate. At end-March, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 5.4 percent and 2.7 percent year on year, 1.4 percentage points and 1 percentage point less, respectively, than the growth rates at end-2019. In Q1, the total floor area of sold units and housing sales decreased by 26.3 percent and 24.7 percent year on year respectively.Investments in real estate development and newly-started real estate projects declined. In Q1, real estate investments in China totaled RMB2.2 trillion, down 7.7 percent year on year, a deceleration of 17.6 percentage points compared with the annual growth rate in 2019. Specifically, investments in residential housing development reached RMB1.6 trillion, down 7.2 percent year on year and a deceleration of 21.1 percentage points from the annual growth rate in 2019, which accounted for 72.9 percent of total investments in real estate development.Growth of real estate loans continued to moderate. At end-March, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) stood at RMB46.2 trillion, up 13.9 percent year on year and a deceleration of 0.9 percentage points from end-2019. Outstanding real estate loans made up 28.8 percent of the total lending balance. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans amounted to RMB31.2 trillion, up 15.9 percent year on year, representing a deceleration of 0.8 percentage points from end-2019. Outstanding housing development loans posted RMB9.0 trillion, rising 13.6 percent year on year and a deceleration of 1 percentage point from end-2019. Outstanding land development loans decreased by 7.5 percent year on year to RMB1.29 trillion, a deceleration of 0.4 percentage points from end-2019. Growth of loans for government-subsidized housing slowed down. At end-March, outstanding loans for government-subsidized housing development totaled RMB4.7 trillion, up 3.9 percent year on year and a deceleration of 2.8 percentage points from end-2019. New loans for government-subsidized housing development reached a cumulative RMB110.8 billion in Q1, a deceleration of RMB117 billion year on year, accounting for 16.9 percent of all incremental real estate development loans. 6.2 The pharmaceutical sector The pharmaceutical sector is closely bound up with the national economy and the people's livelihood, and the safety of people's lives should always be given first priority. With the living standards improving and the people’s health awareness growing, the pharmaceutical sector in China maintained a momentum of rapid development. First, economies of scale grew rapidly. Value added of pharmaceutical enterprises above a designated size witnessed year-on-year growth of 6.6 percent, 0.9 percentage points higher than that of the industrial sector. Second, investments in fixed assets saw fast growth. In 2019, investments in fixed assets of the pharmaceutical sector increased by 8.4 percent over the previous year, 5.3 percentage points faster than that of the manufacturing sector as a whole. Third, prices in the pharmaceutical sector rose steadily. The PPI of the pharmaceutical sector climbed up by 1.7 percent year on year, whereas the overall PPI dipped by 0.3 percent year on year. The pharmaceutical sector in China still faces mounting challenges to maintain sound development. First, technological research and innovation need to be improved, as pharmaceutical enterprises are still weak in fundamental research and in translating research results into applications. Second, upgrading the quality of pharmaceutical products remains a pending task. Competition in the pharmaceutical sector is fierce, coupled with serious product homogeneity and overcapacity of some products in the sector. In 2019, the capacity utilization rate of the pharmaceutical sector was 76.6 percent, down 1 percentage point from 2018. Third, the industrial concentration of the entire pharmaceutical sector remains low. At end-2019, the number of pharmaceutical enterprises above a designated size totaled 7,382. The sector, boasting a vast number of enterprises, is still struggling with a lack of scale and a low concentration of enterprises. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, the CPC Central Committee and the State Council have placed great importance on the development and application of diagnostic reagents and medicines as well as on the provision of medical supplies. As a result, the sector realized an expansion of capacity and an increase in output within a short period of time, effectively meeting the needs of pandemic containment. Going forward, efforts should be made to advance research and development of safe and effective vaccines in a timely manner on the basis of adhering to science and ensuring safety. Meanwhile, efforts should also be made to enhance investments in pharmaceutical enterprises, accelerate the upgrading of product quality, promote industry-wide resource integration, and improve the long-run competitiveness of the pharmaceutical sector. Financial support will be enhanced in a bid to bolster the rapid and high-quality development of the pharmaceutical sector. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy The first quarter of 2020 witnessed an unprecedented impact of COVID-19 on economic and social development in China. However, the impact is, on the whole, controllable, so the great temporary challenges will not change the fundamentals of steady growth, long-term sound development, and high-quality development of the Chinese economy. Under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee, the Chinese economy has demonstrated great resilience. With pandemic containment measures remaining in place, economic and social activities have gradually returned to normal, and work and production have resumed, approaching or reaching normal levels. The fight against the pandemic has spawned and promoted rapid development of many new industries and business models. The proactive fiscal policy has been more intensified and the sound monetary policy more flexible and appropriate, with higher priority given to supporting recovery of the real economy. Money and credit as well as aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) have been growing at a rate consistent with economic development, and the liquidity has been maintained adequate at a reasonable level. With proactive and effective structural monetary policies, financial support for the real economy, especially for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and private enterprises, has been continuously intensified. With prudent and decisive measures taken to prevent and control financial risks, the financial system has been generally healthy and capable of defusing various risks. The RMB exchange rate has remained basically stable and exhibited more flexibility in two-way fluctuations, thereby effectively preventing shocks of external financial risks. The risk of a global recession is intensifying, while the domestic economy is confronted with increasing challenges. Destabilizing factors and uncertainties have increased significantly as the global pandemic continues to spread. According to projections by the IMF, the global economy will experience a growth of –3 percent in 2020, a deceleration of 5.9 percentage points compared to 2019. With frequent breakouts of black swan events in international financial markets, the major countries have collectively adopted zero-rate monetary policies, and the balance sheets of the central banks have seen a sharp expansion. The pressures arising from imported pandemic case prevention and from international economic risks have been building up in China, and the resumption of work and production as well as economic and social development are facing new difficulties, in that structural, institutional, and cyclical concerns are intertwined and thereby pose unprecedented challenges for economic development. The current conditions necessitate work to fully assess the difficulties, risks, and uncertainties, enhance the sense of urgency, and ensure solid implementation of tasks regarding economic and social development. In response to problems caused by COVID-19, such as lack of demand, decline in consumption, difficulties in business operations, and building pressures on employment, cyclical adjustments will be intensified, strategies to increase domestic demand will be firmly implemented, and work concerning pandemic containment as well as economic and social development will be carried forward in a coordinated way. Inflation is generally under control and expectations are basically stable, with future developments to be watched closely. In the first two months of Q1 2020, the CPI temporarily soared above 5 percent, which was mainly due to the rapid rise in food prices, such as the price of pork, around the Spring Festival and the shrinking supply because of the pandemic. With the orderly resumption of work and production under way, and multiple measures taken by government departments to guarantee supply and stabilize prices, the CPI has shown a decelerating trend as it dropped to 4.3 percent in March, and inflation expectations are generally stable. Due to weak domestic demand and plunging commodity prices, the PPI retreated below zero with a deeper drop after temporarily turning positive in January. Factors such as COVID-19 may cause price disturbances in the short term through both supply and demand, which warrant continued monitoring and analysis. However, judging by the fundamentals, China’s economic performance is generally stable, and aggregate supply and demand are basically in equilibrium, providing no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage Under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will resolutely implement the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, remain committed to achieving the target of completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and coordinate pandemic containment with economic and social development. With pandemic response measures kept in place, it will adhere to the guiding principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and uphold the new development philosophy. Efforts will be intensified to ensure stability in six key areas, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and market expectations, and to safeguard employment, people's basic livelihood, market entities, food and energy security, stability of industrial and supply chains, and the smooth functioning of grassroots administration, with the aim of achieving a decisive victory in the tough battle against poverty and completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. The PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is more flexible and appropriate, while the intensity, focus, and pace of policy conduct will be properly managed to accommodate changes in the pandemic containment situation and economic development at different stages. As countercyclical adjustments will be stressed in monetary policy, the PBC will attach higher priority to supporting the recovery of the real economy by adopting aggregate and structural policies to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to help the real economy, particularly MSMEs, pull through the difficulties. The role of central bank lending and central bank discount policies as a propelling force will be brought into full play to provide financial services precisely for pandemic containment, the resumption of work and production, and development of the real economy. The relationship among stabilizing growth, safeguarding employment, adjusting structures, preventing risks, and controlling inflation will be properly handled, while work will be done to keep prices basically stable and to guide expectations in various ways. Moreover, the PBC will support banks replenishing capital through multiple channels so as to enhance their capacity to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. It will further the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and move ahead with the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans in an orderly manner so as to smooth the mechanism of monetary policy transmission and guide market lending rates to move downward. The PBC will coordinate RMB and foreign exchange policies, and properly balance the domestic and external economic dynamics. It will deepen financial supply-side structural reforms, improve the modern financial system to make it highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive, and foster a virtuous cycle in the national economy. First, the PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is more flexible and appropriate, enhance countercyclical adjustments, and keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. It will closely monitor liquidity supply and demand as well as domestic and international markets, and employ a mix of monetary policy tools to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level so that the growth of M2 and AFRE are basically in line with and slightly higher than nominal GDP growth. Macro management will be more forward-looking, precise, proactive, and effective, while the intensity and pace of liquidity injections will be better managed to ensure that money market rates perform stably within a reasonable range. The PBC will try to reach a dynamic balance among multiple targets, attach more importance to some targets such as economic growth and employment, and counter the impact of the pandemic with more forceful policies, thereby creating a favorable monetary and financial environment for effective containment of the pandemic and for supporting the recovery of the real economy. It will properly balance an internal equilibrium with an external equilibrium, and maintain China’s status as one of the few major economies in the world that is pursuing a normal monetary policy. Work will be done to improve the capital replenishment mechanism to make it sustainable, encourage banks to replenish capital through multiple channels such as the issuance of perpetual bonds, and prioritize support for capital replenishment of small and medium-sized banks so as to enhance their capacity to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will give full play to the role of central bank lending and central bank discount policies as a propelling force and provide financial services precisely for pandemic containment, the resumption of work and production, and the development of the real economy. It will continue giving play to the RMB300 billion of special central bank lending to fight the pandemic and guarantee supply until the quota is used up. Financial institutions will be guided to continue using the RMB 500 billion of central bank lending and central bank discount quotas to support the orderly resumption of work and production. Moreover, central bank lending and central bank discount policies with a total quota of RMB1 trillion will be properly implemented in line with the ongoing recovery of the real economy and will link up seamlessly with the preceding RMB300 billion and RMB500 billion. The PBC will further step up credit support for agro-linked enterprises, micro and small businesses (MSBs), private enterprises, foreign trade enterprises, and industries severely affected by the pandemic and will guide the reduction of social financing costs. Third, the PBC will explore the role of monetary and credit policies in promoting economic structural adjustments so as to better serve the real economy. It will further improve the required reserve ratio (RRR) policy framework featuring “three tranches and two preferential treatments”, and establish and improve a long-term mechanism of increasing bank loans to MSBs. Policy coordination will be enhanced so that financial resources will be channeled to fields that will benefit both the demand and supply sides and produce a multiplier effect, such as advanced manufacturing, livelihood improvements, and weak links in infrastructure development, thereby promoting industrial and consumption upgrading. Research will be conducted on the linkup between financial support for poverty eradication and rural revitalization policies, while work will be accelerated to roll out measures for the assessment of commercial banks’ services for rural revitalization. The PBC will guide financial institutions to improve incentives in internal assessments, enhance implementation of the mechanism under which people who have fulfilled their duties will not be held liable for losses, and strengthen cooperation with government-backed guarantee agencies in an effort to facilitate the allocation of more credit resources to MSBs and private enterprises. Work will be done to promote the development of supply chain finance and ramp up financial support for MSMEs based on the creditworthiness of core enterprises. The expiration date for the policy of delayed repayment of principal and interest will be duly extended for enterprises, particularly MSMEs, whose employment remains basically stable. Adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and the requirement that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will maintain the continuity, consistency, and stability of real estate finance policies. Fourth, the PBC will make more efforts to deepen the market-based interest rate reform and the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism so as to enhance the efficiency of financial resource allocations. The LPR reform will move steadily deeper. In line with market-oriented and law-based principles, the PBC will move ahead with the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans in an orderly manner so as to smooth the mechanism of monetary policy transmission and to further bring down social financing costs by means of reform. It will make effective use of the self-regulatory mechanism for market rate pricing, regulate deposit rate pricing conduct, and urge banks to strictly implement the requirement for explicit indications of annualized loan rates so as to protect the rights and interests of consumers. Taking steady steps forward to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will continue to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, maintain the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and explore the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The PBC will strengthen macroprudential management to stabilize market expectations and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Steps will be accelerated to develop the foreign exchange market and to provide services of exchange rate risk management for import and export companies with authentic needs. Enterprises will be guided to be risk neutral in financial management and to manage exchange rate risks with foreign exchange derivatives. Efforts will be made to steadily advance the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and promote the use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment. Fifth, the PBC will improve the financial market system and enable financial markets to play an effective role in stabilizing growth, promoting structural adjustments, advancing reform, and guarding against risks. Institution building in the management of financial bonds will be strengthened to establish a tiered and categorized shelf-like system for the management of financial bond issuances. Measures will be taken to support equity financing and bond financing by private enterprises and to enhance the capacity of the financial sector to serve the real economy. Work will be done to push for uniform standards for information disclosures of corporate debenture bonds and to improve the relevant regulations. The mechanism of bond default risk prevention and resolution will be improved in line with marketoriented and law-based principles. The PBC will enhance coordination and interconnectivity between financial market infrastructures, and push forward with the building of custodian banks and trade repositories to ensure that financial markets are generally stable while performing safely and efficiently. Active but prudent steps will be taken to promote an institutional and systemic opening-up of the bond market and to introduce more medium- and long-term investors into the market. Sixth, the PBC will deepen the financial supply-side structural reforms and improve the modern financial system to make it highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive. Reforms of financial institutions will be further promoted. More work will be done to promote full implementation of the reform plans for development financial institutions and policy banks so as to improve their governance system, set strict boundaries for their businesses, and better bring out their role in line with the management practices of financial institutions. Reforms of large commercial banks and other large financial enterprises will deepen so as to improve their corporate governance, regulate the relationship between the general meeting of shareholders, the board of directors, the board of supervisors, and management, and improve authorized management, thereby giving rise to effective decision-making, implementation as well as checks and balances, and enhancing their business management and risk control capabilities. Seventh, the PBC will make continued efforts to fight the tough battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks so as to ensure that risks are generally controllable and steadily subsiding, and to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Under the leadership of the State Council Financial Stability and Development Committee, while consolidating the success already achieved, the PBC will adhere to the fundamental principles of maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision. It will consider new developments in the macroeconomic situation from a holistic perspective, focus on key issues, and manage the pace of work properly so as to ensure that the tasks of defusing risks set forth in the decisions of the CPC Central Committee will be fulfilled as scheduled, thereby creating a favorable financial environment for completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects in 2020. Part 1. Money and Credit AnalysisSince the beginning of 2020, the People's Bank of China (PBC) has resolutelyimplemented the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and theState Council. With the sound monetary policy more flexible and appropriate, andcountercyclical adjustments yielding significant results, financing costs continuouslydeclined, the credit structure was further improved, and the quality and efficiency offinancial services for the real economy were increasingly higher. The PBC haseffectively supported pandemic containment, work and production resumption, anddevelopment of the real economy. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable levelIn H1 2020, facing complicated and grave domestic and international situations, inaccordance with the requirement that sound monetary policies should be more flexibleand appropriate, the PBC employed a monetary policy toolkit that included requiredreserve ratio (RRR) cuts, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central banklending and central bank discounts to release medium and long-term liquidity. It alsohad a flexible grasp of the intensity and pace of open market operations (OMOs) tokeep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. In addition, with strengthenedexpectation management, money market interest rates were guided to move smoothlyaround OMO rates.II. Lending by financial institutions grew relatively rapidly, with the creditstructure optimized and lending rates moving downwardsThe PBC guided credit supply toward the needs of enterprises to resume work andproduction. It continued to push down financing costs and promote lending in favor ofmicro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), thus providing targetedsupport for pandemic containment, work and production resumption, anddevelopment of the real economy. Outstanding loans issued by financial institutions indomestic and foreign currencies grew 13.0 percent year on year to RMB171.3 trillionat the end of June, up RMB12.7 trillion from the beginning of the year and anacceleration of RMB2.9 trillion from the corresponding period of 2019. OutstandingRMB-denominated loans grew 13.2 percent year on year to RMB165.2 trillion, upRMB12.1 trillion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of RMB2.4trillion from the corresponding period of 2019. The improvement in the credit structure and stronger support for the financing ofmicro and small business (MSB) met enterprises鈥  liquidity needs and the entiresociety鈥檚 demands for funds to contain the pandemic. Loans to enterprises and publicentities grew by RMB8.8 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-yearincrease of RMB2.5 trillion. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sectorgained 24.7 percent, hitting a record high within a decade. Outstanding inclusiveloans to MSBs grew by 26.5 percent year on year to RMB13.5 trillion at the end ofJune, recording a growth increase of 3.4 percentage points from the end of theprevious year and supporting 29.64 million MSBs, which was a year-on-year increaseof 21.8 percent. The growth of loans to the household sector slowed down to 14.0percent at end-June, 1.5 percentage points lower than that at end-2019.The weighted average interest rates on loans declined and corporate lending ratescontinued to move downwards. In June, the one-year loan prime rate (LPR) fell by 0.3percentage points from December 2019 to 3.85 percent, and the over-five-year LPRfell by 0.15 percentage points to 4.65 percent. In June, the weighted average lendingrate recorded 5.06 percent, down 0.38 percentage points from December 2019 and 0.6percentage points year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate onordinary loans registered 5.26 percent, down 0.48 percentage points from December2019 and 0.68 percentage points year on year; the weighted average corporate lendingrate dropped 0.48 percentage points from December 2019 to 4.64 percent in June, adrop clearly exceeding that of the LPR, which is conducive to lowering the financingcosts of enterprises.In June, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered70.03 percent, 5.97 percent, and 24 percent, respectively. In general, the upward anddownward float of the loan rates around the LPR moved downward as a wholecompared with that in March.The sustained easy monetary policies of the developed economies prompted adecrease in the interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans. In June, theweighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominateddeposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.20 percent and 0.75 percentrespectively, down 0.01 percentage points and 0.68 percentage points respectivelyfrom March. The weighted average interest rates of USD-denominated loans withmaturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months)and 6 months registered 1.57 percent and 1.47 percent respectively, down 0.62percentage points and 0.45 percentage points respectively from March Growth of deposits picked up. At the end of June, outstanding deposits in domesticand foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB213.0 trillion, up 10.5percent year on year, 1.9 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previousyear. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB207.5 trillion, up 10.6 percent yearon year, 1.9 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD778.4 billion, an increase ofUSD20.6 billion from the beginning of the year and a deceleration of USD11.9 billionyear on year. Fiscal revenues declined, while expenditures on pandemic containmentincreased. Fiscal deposits decreased by 4.5 percent year on year. III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at amuch higher rate than that in 2019At the end of June, outstanding M2 recorded RMB213.5 trillion, up 11.1 percent yearon year, an acceleration of 2.4 percentage points from the end of 2019. OutstandingM1 registered RMB60.4 trillion, a year-on-year growth of 6.5 percent and 2.1percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding M0reached RMB7.9 trillion, up 9.5 percent year on year, a growth increase of 4.1percentage points from the end of 2019. The first half of 2020 witnessed a net cashinjection of RMB227 billion into the economy, a rise of RMB289.8 billion year onyear. According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the realeconomy (AFRE) reached RMB271.8 trillion at the end of June, up 12.8 percent yearon year and an acceleration of 2.1 percentage points over the end of the previous year. In H1 2020, the incremental AFRE reached RMB20.83 trillion on a cumulative basis, an increase of RMB6.22 trillion year on year. Growth of the AFRE was characterizedby the following features. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-yearincrease. Second, the drop in entrusted loans narrowed, and the year-on-year growthin undiscounted bankers鈥  acceptances expanded. Third, both corporate bonds andequity financing increased considerably compared with the previous year. Fourth, government bonds saw a significantly larger year-on-year increase. Fifth, the declineof asset-backed securities of depository financial institutions accelerated from theprevious year, while the growth of written-off loans accelerated. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable, and cross-border RMBtransactions continued to growSince the beginning of 2020, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supplyand demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations generallystable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in bothdirections and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In H1, the RMB exchange rate generally held steady against a basket of currencies. At theend of June, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange-rateindex and the RMB exchange-rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs)basket closed at 92.05 and 90.78, up 0.72 percent and down 1.12 percent fromend-2019, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for InternationalSettlements (BIS), as of the end of June, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER)and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 0.50 percent anddepreciated 0.43 percent, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation regime commenced to end-June 2020, the NEER and REER of the RMBappreciated by 32.97 percent and 45.82 percent, respectively. In H1, the RMBdepreciated modestly against the USD. At the end of June, the central parity of theRMB against the USD was 7.0795, a depreciation of 1.46 percent from end-2019. From the launch of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005, thecentral parity of the RMB against the USD appreciated by 16.91 percent on acumulative basis. In H1, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rateagainst the USD was 4.6 percent. Cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow with roughly balanced receipts andpayments. In H1 2020, cross-border receipts and payments in RMB totaled RMB12.7trillion, up 36 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and paymentsregistered RMB6.3 trillion and RMB6.4 trillion, respectively. RMB cross-borderreceipts and payments under the current account grew 10 percent over the previousyear to RMB3.1 trillion. Specifically, settlement of trade in goods registered RMB2.2trillion, whereas settlement of trade in services and other items registered acumulative RMB0.9 trillion. RMB cross-border receipts and payments under thecapital account posted RMB9.6 trillion, up 47 percent year on year. Part 2. Monetary Policy OperationsSince the beginning of 2020, amid the daunting challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the PBC has adhered to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialismwith Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, resolutely implemented the decisions andarrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, andadopted a sound monetary policy in a more flexible and appropriate manner. Based onthe current situation highlighted by pandemic containment and work and productionresumption, the PBC flexibly managed the intensity, pace, and focus of adjustments, remained committed to the specific goals of maintaining an appropriate aggregatepolicy, substantially lowering financing costs and supporting the real economy inresponse to the highly uncertain situation, and shore up the economy to tap into itspotential so as to create a favorable environment for ensuring stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domesticinvestment and expectations, and maintaining security in six areas, namely, employment, people鈥  s basic livelihood, operations of market entities, food and energysecurity, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning ofprimary-level governments. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible mannerFlexibly conducting open market operations (OMOs) and maintaining liquidityadequate at a reasonable level. In the first half of 2020, in addition to cutting therequired reserve ratio (RRR) three times, conducting the medium-term lending facility(MLF) operations, and providing central bank lending and central bank discounts, thePBC conducted OMOs in a flexible manner and maintained adequate liquidity at areasonable level in the banking system, which was neither loosened nor tightened, with the excess reserve ratio of the system approximating 1.5鈥 2 percent. Since thebeginning of Q2, to cushion the impact of short-term factors such as intensivegovernment bond issuances as well as the annual settlement and payment of thecorporate income tax, the PBC has managed well the strength and pace of OMOs andhas ironed out short-term liquidity fluctuations in a timely manner. A series of 14-dayrepo operations has been conducted since mid-June, preemptively meeting theheightened liquidity demand at mid-year, stabilizing market expectations, and thusproviding a favorable liquidity environment for government bond issuances. The OMO rates remained stable. Since the beginning of Q2, the 7-day repo rate hasremained unchanged at 2.20 percent, which has neither declined due to monetaryeasing adopted by the developed economies nor increased, sending a clear signal ofstability. In the meanwhile, various means were taken to strengthen expectationsmanagement and to guide money market rates to move smoothly around the OMOrates, hence bringing into play the role of OMO rates as the center of short-termmarket rates. In Q2, money market rates witnessed stable movement in general. InApril, due to the zero interest rate policy and the quantitative easing adopted by thecentral banks of the developed economies, participants in the interbank market pushed down money market rates, which once even deviated from the OMO rates. In lateMay, with market expectations returning to rationality, money market rates reboundedand stayed close to the OMO rates. In Q2, the 7-day rate (DR007), which is a fundingrate between depository institutions in the interbank market, averaged 1.66 percent, 45basis points lower than that in Q1. At end-June, the DR007 stood at 2.30 percent, 26basis points lower than that at the same time last year. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In order tosupport banks to replenish capital through perpetual bond issuances and to furtherimprove the market liquidity of perpetual bonds issued by banks, the PBC conductedCBS operations three times in Q2, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent. Sincethe beginning of 2020, the PBC has conducted CBS operations once in each month, totaling RMB31 billion. The perpetual bonds swapped with the PBC included notonly those issued by large-sized commercial banks and joint-stock commercial banksbut also those issued by urban commercial banks and rural commercial banks. TheCBS operations played a positive role in improving liquidity on the secondary marketof bank-issued perpetual bonds and supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds toreplenish capital by banks, especially small and medium-sized banks. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q2, the PBC issuedthree batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB40 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB20 billion, RMB10 billion, and RMB10 billion, respectively. In H1 2020, the PBC issued inHong Kong six batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in a total amount ofRMB80 billion, with the outstanding balance standing at RMB80 billion as ofend-June. The regular issuance of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kongnot only enriched RMB investment products with high credit ratings and RMBliquidity management tools on the Hong Kong market but also fostered the offshoreissues of RMB bonds by other entities, thus promoting the use of RMB as aninternational currency. II. Conducting Medium-term Lending Facility and Standing Lending FacilityoperationsWell-timed Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) operations were conducted. The supply of monetary base was ensured and MLF rates declined. In the first half of2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1 trillion of MLF operations, all with amaturity of one year. Specifically, the amount of MLF operations posted RMB400billion in Q2. At end-June, the outstanding MLF registered RMB3.55 trillion, RMB140 billion less than that at the beginning of the year. The one-year MLF ratedeclined by 20 basis points from the previous operation to 2.95 percent on April 15and levelled off in May and June. The MLF rate, as the mid-term policy rate, is thecenter of the mid-term market rates. Market interest rates, such as the governmentbond yield curve and interbank certificates of deposit, fluctuate around the MLF rate. As the MLF rate represents the banks鈥  average marginal mid-term funding cost, itsdecline meant the latter dropped, which was helpful to bring down the corporatelending rates through the LPR and to foster lower social financing costs. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner. The demand for short-term liquidity of locally incorporated financial institutions wasmet in the full amount, with the SLF playing the role as the ceiling of the interest ratecorridor, thus promoting the smooth operation of the money market. In the first half of2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB151.4 billion SLF operations, of whichRMB48.7 billion of operations were conducted in Q2. The balance of SLF operationsregistered RMB7.3 billion at end-June. On April 10, the overnight, 7-day, and1-month SLF rates were lowered by 30 basis points to reach 3.05 percent, 3.2 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively. III. Enhancing monetary and credit support to offset the impact of theIn accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC CentralCommittee and the State Council, the PBC coordinated pandemic containmentwith economic and social development, rolled out a series of monetary and creditpolicies, and strived to stabilize businesses and secure employment, in an aim toensure stability on six fronts and to maintain security in six areas. First, liquidity remained adequate at a reasonable level. RMB1.7 trillion ofshort-term liquidity was pumped into the financial market when it reopened after theSpring Festival vacation, which effectively stabilized market expectations. The threereductions of the RRR released RMB1.75 trillion of long-term funds. Second, RMB1.8 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts wasprovided in three steps, and coordinated efforts were made to promote pandemiccontainment and economic and social development. In the first half of 2020, thePBC provided RMB300 billion of special central bank lending, RMB500 billion ofcentral bank lending and central bank discounts, and RMB1 trillion of central banklending and central bank discounts in three steps, with a combined quota of RMB1.8trillion, to support containment of the pandemic, provision of medical supplies anddaily necessities, resumption of work and production, and development of the realeconomy, especially the micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). As ofend-June, the policy of RMB300 billion of special central bank lending and RMB500billion of central bank lending and central bank discounts had been fully implemented. As of July 27, central bank lending and central bank discounts in the amount ofRMB1 trillion had supported locally incorporated banks to issue a total of RMB457.3billion in loans at preferential interest rates, thus playing a vital role in supportingpandemic containment as well as work and production resumption. Third, two monetary policy instruments that directly support the real economywere launched to bolster the development of small and medium-sized enterprises(SMEs) and to stabilize businesses and secure employment. On June 1, 2020, thePBC, jointly with the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC), Ministry of Finance (MOF), the National Development and Reform Commission(NDRC), and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), issuedthe Notice on Extending the Policy of Provisional Deferred Repayments of LoanPrincipal and Interest for Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (YinfaNo.122 [2020]), stipulating that, for the principal of inclusive micro and smallbusiness (MSB) loans that were to mature within the year and for the accrued interestof inclusive MSB loans outstanding at end-2020, banking financial institutions shallgrant deferred repayments of the principal and interest for a certain period of time to enterprises upon application, extending the repayment deadline up to March 31, 2021, with the penalty interest waived. On the same day, the Notice of the PBC on IssuesRegarding Instruments Supporting Deferred Repayments of Inclusive Loans for Microand Small Businesses (Yinfa No.124 [2020]) was issued, which stipulated that thePBC launched an instrument in support of deferred repayments of inclusive MSBloans, set up RMB40 billion of central bank lending, and provided an incentiveequivalent to approximately 1 percent of the deferred loan principal to locallyincorporated banks, so as to ease the MSBs鈥  pressure of deferring the repayment ofthe loan principal and interest. In addition, the Notice of the PBC on Issues Regardingthe Support Scheme for Inclusive Unsecured Loans for Micro and Small Businesses(Yinfa No.125 [2020]) was issued on the same day, stating that the PBC launched asupport scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans, in which RMB400 billion ofcentral bank lending would be set up and banks would be provided with favorablefunding equivalent to 40 percent of the unsecured loans that they had actually issued, thus substantively easing the financing strains on the MSBs. The two new instrumentsdirectly link monetary policy operations with financial institutions鈥  support forinclusive MSBs, which ensures targeted adjustments and provides vigorous supportfor stabilizing businesses and securing employment. Fourth, synergy in the financial system was forged. Financial institutions wereguided to provide differentiated financial services to areas with different COVID-19alert levels. Major state-owned banks were urged to ramp up support for inclusiveMSBs, special credit support from policy banks was put in place, and locallyincorporated banks were guided to serve local communities effectively. IV. Lowering the required reserve ratio for small and medium-sized banksThe RRR for small and medium-sized banks and the interest rate on excessreserves were cut to support the development of the real economy. On April 3, thePBC announced an RRR cut of 1 percentage point for rural credit cooperatives, ruralcommercial banks, rural cooperative banks, village banks, and city commercial banksthat operate solely within their own provincial-level administrative regions. This cuttook effect in two phases, with a cut of 0.5 percentage points each time, on April 15and May 15 respectively. About RMB400 billion of long-term funds was freed up bythe cut. Meanwhile, starting from April 7, the interest rate on excess reservesdeposited in the central bank by financial institutions was cut from 0.72 percent to0.35 percent. At end-June, the excess reserve ratio for financial institutions stood at1.6 percent, representing a year-on-year reduction of 0.4 percentage points and areduction of 0.5 percentage points from end-March when the cut had not beenannounced. All the above-mentioned policies have contributed to boosting the banks鈥  credit support for MSMEs, enhancing the financial institutions鈥  efficiency in capitaluse, bringing down social financing costs, and shoring up the real economy. V. Further improving the macroprudential policy frameworkThe role of the macroprudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought intoplay to optimize the credit structure and promote the financial supply-sidestructural reform. In Q2 2020, in line with the requirement of the central economicwork conference that medium and long-term funding be increased for themanufacturing sector and the difficulties faced by private firms and MSMEs bealleviated in terms of accessing affordable funding, the PBC further strengthened theassessment of financing for MSBs, private firms, and the manufacturing sector in theMPA, and guided financial institutions to ramp up credit support for them. Improvements were made in the assessment on the use of the loan prime rate (LPR), and the LPR reform continued to play its part in pushing down the loan rates. The supervisory framework for systemically important financial institutions(SIFIs) was improved. In line with the Guiding Opinions on Improving theSupervision of Systemically Important Financial Institutions, the PBC took the lead inthe formulation of Assessment Measures on Systemically Important Banks, clarifyingassessment indicators, process, and the division of work, which helped improve thesupervisory framework for systemically important banks in China. VI. Giving full play to the role of structural monetary policy instrumentsThe PBC actively used central bank lending in support of agriculture and MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policytools to guide financial institutions to step up support for key areas and weaklinks in the national economy, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, ruralareas, and rural residents, as well as poverty alleviation. Central bank lending tosupport special poverty alleviation projects was made good use of to increase creditsupply to areas of extreme poverty, including the 鈥渢hree autonomous regions鈥 , i.e., Tibet, four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, and the Tibetan areas in four provinces, and the 鈥渢hree autonomous prefectures鈥 , i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, to cut down on the financing costs in these areas as well as toachieve targeted poverty alleviation. In Q2, RMB8 billion of central bank lending forspecial poverty alleviation projects was provided, with the nationwide balancestanding at RMB21.9 billion at end-June. Starting from July 1, 2020, the interest rateson central bank lending to support agriculture and MSBs and the central bankdiscount rate were reduced by 25 basis points. After this reduction, the three-month, six-month, and one-year central bank lending to support agriculture and MSBs posted1.95 percent, 2.15 percent, and 2.25 percent, respectively, while the central bankdiscount rate was 2 percent. At end-June, outstanding central bank lending to support agriculture stood at RMB337.2 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBsand for poverty alleviation posted RMB621.4 billion and RMB153.7 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB433.6 billion. In thefirst half of 2020, the PBC made a net withdrawal of PSLs in the amount of RMB28.3billion from policy and development banks, with the net withdrawal in Q2 totalingRMB48.5 billion and the outstanding PSL registering RMB3.509 trillion at end-June. A targeted medium-term lending facility (TMLF) operation was conducted. TheTMLF provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions toexpand credit supply to private firms and MSBs at preferential interest rates. In April, the PBC conducted one-year TMLF operations at an interest rate of 2.95 percent, totaling RMB56.1 billion. The interest rate was 20 basis points lower than that in theprevious operation, and it was at the same level as the latest MLF rate. At the end ofJune, the outstanding TMLF stood at RMB594.3 billion. Box 1 Improving the Structural Monetary Policy ToolkitIn 2020, acting on the fundamental requirement of the financial sector serving the realeconomy, the PBC continued to improve the structural monetary policy toolkit, deployed structural monetary policy instruments in an innovative manner, providedprecise and targeted financial support, effectively supported pandemic containmentand economic and social development, and ramped up support for key areas and weaklinks in the national economy, all of which have achieved good results. Monetary policy can both play the role of an aggregate policy and be animportant force in support of economic structure adjustments, transformation, and upgrading. Frictions exist in the macroeconomic operation, the market systemfaces the risk of market failure, and micro-market entities are heterogeneous in thereal world. If aggregate indicators are the only focus of monetary policy, greaterstructural distortions will arise, making aggregate targets difficult to attain. Therefore, the introduction of an incentive compatibility mechanism helps structural monetarypolicies to achieve the following goals, i.e., enhancing efficiency of capital use, promoting the flow of credit resources into key areas and weak links that have greaterdemand and vitality, leveraging the social and economic efficiency of financialresources, boosting social welfare, and contributing to better aggregate adjustmenteffects. The PBC has long been successful in implementing structural monetary policyinstruments. In wake of the global financial crisis in 2008, the central banks in theadvanced economies came to realize that financial markets were flawed, and manybegan to adopt structural monetary policies, including the Targeted Longer-termRefinancing Operations (TLTRO) of the ECB, and the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) of the Bank of England. The PBC has increased the intensity of structural monetary policy since thebeginning of this year. First, the required reserve framework featuring 鈥渢hreetranches and two preferential treatments鈥  was further improved. The targeted RRR cutfor inclusive finance on March 16 released about RMB550 billion of long-term fundsto support the issuance of loans for inclusive finance. On April 3, the RRR cut forsmall and medium-sized financial institutions, including rural commercial banks, andfor city commercial banks that operate solely within their own provincial-leveladministrative regions was announced, releasing about RMB400 billion of long-termfunds. Second, to cushion the impact of the pandemic, special central bank lendingwith a quota of RMR300 billion as well as inclusive central bank lending and centralbank discounts with a quota of RMB500 billion and RMB1 trillion respectively wererolled out successively. By end-June, the policy of RMB300 billion special centralbank lending and of the RMB500 billion central bank lending and central bankdiscounts had been fully implemented. Specifically, the RMB300 billion quota ofcentral bank lending supported banks in issuing a cumulative RMB283.4 billion ofpreferential loans to a total of 7,597 nationwide and local key enterprises. TheRMB500 billion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts supportedlocally incorporated banks to issue a cumulative RMB498.3 billion of preferentialloans to a total of 590,000 enterprises. Central bank lending and central bankdiscounts with a quota of RMB1 trillion were put in place to make an orderlycontinuation. By July 27, a cumulative RMB457.3 billion of preferential loans hadbeen issued to a total of 780,000 businesses and rural households, with each borrowerreceiving an average of RMB590,000. Third, two monetary policy instruments thatcan provide more direct support for the real economy have been developed. In orderto encourage banks to ease MSMEs鈥  pressures to repay loans, a supportive instrumentto defer the repayment of inclusive loans for MSBs was set up, and RMB40 billion ofcentral bank lending was provided. This move is estimated to support locallyincorporated banks to extend inclusive MSB loan principal approximating RMB3.7trillion. Another supportive scheme to provide unsecured inclusive loans for MSBswas created to alleviate the pain of MSBs with no guarantees in accessing loans, in anattempt to raise the share of unsecured MSB loans. Under this scheme, the RMB400billion of central bank lending is expected to drive locally incorporated banks to issueabout RMB1trillion of unsecured loans for inclusive MSBs. Recently, the PBC, forthe first time, conducted operations under this supportive scheme for eligibleunsecured loans issued by locally incorporated banks from March 1 to May 31, 2020, covering 1,170 locally incorporated banks and 390,000 MSBs nationwide. Theprincipal of eligible unsecured loans reached RMB70.9 billion, with a weightedaverage maturity of 13.6 months and a weighted average interest rate of 6.76 percent. This first operation to support unsecured inclusive loans provided RMB27 billion tolocally incorporated bank and the first interest rate swap operation of the supportiveinstrument for deferred repayments of inclusive MSB loans will be conducted in the near future. It has been proved that structural monetary policy functions effectively infollowing three respects. First, a positive incentive mechanism for financialinstitutions has been set up. The design of the incentive compatibility mechanismenables liquidity injections to play the function of enhancing structural adjustments ofbank credit, to effectively guide the behavior of financial institutions, to respond toemergency shocks such as the pandemic, and to ramp up the support of finance to keyareas in the real economy. Second, a reimbursement-based mechanism to optimizefinancial institutions鈥  credit has been set up. Through the provision of low-cost fundsto financial institutions with partial or total refunding, financial institutions are guidedto step up credit support for the key areas and weak links in the national economy. Third, the interest rate plays a guiding role. By bringing into play the role ofstructural monetary policy in guiding the movement of the interest rate, the centralbank has strengthened effective guidance of the interest rate and lowered socialfinancing costs. Since the beginning of 2020, financing for MSMEs grew in bothvolume and coverage and was offered at lower prices. At end-June, outstandinginclusive loans for MSBs grew by 26.5 percent year on year, 3.4 percentage pointshigher than the growth at the end of the previous year. The interest rate of corporateloans averaged 4.64 percent, 0.48 percentage points lower than that in last December. Inclusive loans for MSBs supported 29.64 million MSB entities, a year-on-yearincrease of 21.8 percent. Going forward, the PBC will continue to leverage the role of structural monetarypolicy instruments in providing precise and targeted financial support, enable thepolicies to provide more direct support for the real economy, guide financialinstitutions to ramp up support for MSBs and private firms, earnestly fulfill its dutiesto ensure stability on six fronts and comprehensively implement the task ofmaintaining security in six areas, so as to promote a virtuous cycle between financeand the real economy. VII. Leveraging the structural guidance role of credit policiesWith an orientation toward high-quality development, the PBC further optimized thefinancial structure, guided financial institutions to continuously enhance their supportto key areas of the national economy and to weak links, and intensified efforts tostabilize businesses and secure employment in an attempt to ensure success in thebattle of poverty elimination and in the building of a moderately prosperous society inall respects. First, comprehensive mobilization and deployment were carried outto provide support for stabilizing businesses and securing employment by thefinancial sector. Based on special research on the subject of 鈥渟ecuring market entities鈥 , the PBC published the Guidelines on the Work of Stabilizing Businesses andSecuring Employment by the Financial Sector. Monetary policy tools were innovatedto provide more direct support for the real economy. The PBC enhanced creditsupport for market entities and released guiding opinions on further strengtheningfinancial services to MSMEs, jointly with other authorities, in a bid to raise the scale, reduce the costs, improve the quality, and expand the coverage of these services. ThePBC enhanced support for medium and long-term financing of the manufacturingindustry and established a coordination and negotiation mechanism among ministriesfor medium and long-term loans for the manufacturing industry. The PBC published anotice on enhancing interest support to secured loans for start-ups and stepped upfinancial support for the employment and entrepreneurship of special social groups, such as veterans, college graduates, and migrant workers returning home to startbusinesses. Second, financial services were provided to effectively promotetargeted poverty alleviation. The PBC strengthened the application of policy toolsand its corresponding guidance, allocated more financial resources to extremely poorareas as well as to counties that were still labeled as poverty-stricken, enhancedmanagement of potential risks with respect to poverty alleviation by the financialsector, and promoted the establishment of a long-term mechanism for providinghigh-quality and sustainable financial support for poverty alleviation. Third, financial services were further strengthened to support rural revitalization. Measures were taken to provide financial support for safeguarding spring farming, tillage preparation, and hog production, and for securing the effective supply ofessential agricultural products. Financial institutions were guided to reinforce supportfor agricultural fixed-asset investments and the construction of high-standardfarmland. Efforts were made to enhance financial support for warehouse logisticsenterprises in a bid to boost the quality and efficiency of circulation businesses. Financial services for new-type agricultural business entities were stepped up tofacilitate the integration of small farmers into the agricultural industry chain. Fourth, coordinated regional development was promoted. Focused on the planning, construction, reforms and development of Xiongan New Area, efforts were made toimprove the system of financial supportive policies and guide financial institutions toprovide more financial resources for key areas and major projects through multiplechannels. Continuous efforts were made to provide better financial services for majorregional development strategies, such as the coordinated development ofBeijing-Tianjin-Hebei, the development of the Yangtze River Economic Belt, theconstruction of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, thedevelopment of regional integration of the Yangtze River Delta, and the constructionof Hainan Pilot Free Trade Zone and Free Trade Port. VIII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reformThe PBC advanced the LPR reform and lowered the loan rates for enterprises. The application of the LPR was further promoted. The one-year and above-five-year LPR reported in June were 3.85 percent and 4.65 percent, respectively, down 20 basispoints and 10 basis points from March, respectively. Following the LPR trendingdownward, loan rates were notably reduced, with a decline larger than that of the LPR. In line with market-oriented and law-based principles, the PBC promoted a shift in thepricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans in an orderly manner. By theend of June, 55 percent of outstanding loans had completed the shift in the pricingbenchmark, including 76 percent of the outstanding corporate loans. During thetransition, the interest rates on loans were somewhat lowered, which could directlyreduce the enterprises鈥  interest expenses. From the beginning of the next price-settingperiod, enterprises can enjoy additional policy benefits brought about by the loweredLPR, which will further notably reduce their financing costs. A market-based LPR canbetter reflect changes in market supply and demand, which will significantly improvethe efficiency of the transmission of monetary policy to loan interest rates. Meanwhile, the LPR reform plays an important role in the market-based reform of deposit interestrates. Box 2 Improvements in the Interest Rate Transmission MechanismIn August 2019, in accordance with the arrangements of the State Council, the PBCreformed and improved the formation mechanism for the LPR which allowed panelbanks to make quotes by adding some basis points to the MLF rate. The number ofbasis points added was mainly determined by factors such as the funding costs ofbanks, market demand and supply, and the risk premium. As the central bank鈥檚 medium-term policy interest rate, the MLF rate represents themarginal funding cost of the banking system to obtain medium-term base money fromthe central bank. Since the central bank is in charge of supplying base money, itspolicy interest rates undoubtedly constitute the basis of market interest rate pricingand serve as the pivot of market interest rate movements. Although the proportion offunds provided by the MLF and other monetary policy instruments is not high amongthe banks鈥  liabilities, it is the marginal amount rather than the total amount that playsa decisive role in affecting market interest rates. Under the credit money system ofbanks, the entities of money creation are banks. After creating deposits by expandingassets, banks need more base money to satisfy the reserve requirements. Therefore, there exists a continuous demand for base money. As the central bank takes charge ofbase money supply, it only needs a few necessary operations to exert a decisivemarginal impact on the market interest rates rather than operations in huge amount tomake central bank funds the main liabilities of the banks. The MLF rate as themedium-term policy interest rate, together with the OMO rate as the short-term policyinterest rate, forms the system of policy interest rates of the central bank, whichconveys signals of central bank鈥檚 interest rate adjustments. In addition, as its maturitymatches that of the LPR, the MLF is suitable to be used by banks as an importantreference for loan pricing, i.e., the price of the funds provided by the banking system for the real economy. Taking into account their respective funding costs and otherfactors, panel banks can make quotes by adding some basis points to the MLF rate. Infact, the spread between the LPR and the MLF rate is not totally fixed, which reflectsthe market-oriented feature of the panel banks鈥  quotation. Affected by various factors, the interest rates of interbank CDs, repos, interbank lending, and other interbankfinancing instruments, as well as the yield curve of treasury bonds, fluctuate in theshort-term. However, in the medium and long-term run, they will mainly fluctuatearound the central bank鈥檚 policy interest rates. Since the reform, the LPR quotation has gradually trended downward, which hasreflected well the direction of the central bank鈥檚 monetary policy and the demand andsupply of market funds. It has not only become a key reference for loan interest rateprice-setting by banks but also has been internalized into the funds transfer pricing(FTP) of the banks鈥  internal funds. The original implicit floor for loan interest rateshas been completely removed, with the transmission channel for monetary policyeffectively smoothed. An interest rate transmission mechanism featuring 鈥淢LFrates鈫扡PR鈫抣oan interest rates鈥  has been fully demonstrated. Meanwhile, the LPR reform has effectively promoted the market-oriented reform ofdeposit interest rates. Although no adjustment has been made to the benchmarkdeposit interest rates since October 2015, the caps and floors of deposit interest rateshave both been removed, so the actual deposit interest rates executed by banks can beset on a discretionary and floating-rate basis. With the deepening of the LPR reform, loan interest rates have become more market-oriented and connected to the markets. Due to the remarkable decrease in loan interest rates after the reform, banks willreasonably lower the costs of their liabilities in an attempt to match asset incomes. Subsequently, there will be fewer incentives for banks to attract deposits at highinterest rates, thus guiding the decline of deposit interest rates. In fact, against thebackdrop of unchanged benchmark deposit interest rates, banks鈥  deposit interest ratesof all maturities have recently decreased. In June, a number of large-scale banksvoluntarily lowered the issuance interest rates on 3-year and 5-year negotiable CDs, followed by the downward adjustments by joint-stock banks accordingly and thedecline of deposit interest rates in some local incorporated banks. In June 2020, theaverage weighted interest rate of negotiable CDs of large-scale state-owned banks andjoint-stock banks registered 2.64 percent and 2.71 percent, respectively, 30 basispoints and 34 basis points lower than those of December 2019. The yield ofrepresentative money market funds has fallen below 1.5 percent, lower than the 1-yearbenchmark deposit interest rate. The yields of banks鈥  structural deposits and wealthmanagement products have also declined. This has fully illustrated the effectivenessof the market mechanism in reducing deposit interest rates through the LPR reform, the improved efficiency of monetary policy transmission to deposit interest rates, andthe significant progress made in the market-oriented deposit interest rate reform. IX. Improving the market-oriented RMB exchange rate regimeThe PBC continued to advance the market-oriented exchange rate reform and toimprove the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply anddemand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of theexchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizerin adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In the meantime, thePBC attached importance to guiding expectations and keeping the RMB exchangerate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In H1, the highest andlowest CNY central parities were 6.8606 and 7.1316 against the USD, respectively. During the 117 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 60 days and depreciated on 57days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 0.65 percent (456 bps)and 0.76 percent (530 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate against other majorinternational currencies floated two-ways with both appreciations and depreciations. At end-June, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the euro, and theJapanese yen had depreciated 1.46 percent, 1.83 percent, and 2.62 percentrespectively from end-2019, while the RMB had appreciated 5.00 percent against thepound. From the RMB exchange rate regime reform in 2005 to end-June 2020, theRMB against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen appreciated by a cumulativetotal of 16.91 percent, 25.79 percent, and 11.02 percent respectively. Direct RMBtrading was buoyant on the interbank foreign exchange market with steady liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and facilitatebilateral trade and investment. As of end-June, under the bilateral currency-swap agreements between the PBC andforeign monetary authorities, the latter utilized a total of RMB32.736 billion, and theformer utilized an equivalent of USD431 million denominated in foreign currencies. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment. X. Promoting resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner anddeepening the reforms of financial institutionsDisposal of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions wassuccessfully implemented. The PBC actively defused hidden risks in some citycommercial banks, rural commercial banks, and rural credit cooperatives over theyears, and maximally protected the legitimate rights and interests of creditors. Itpromoted provincial-level governments to formulate risk disposal plans for small andmedium-sized financial institutions, according to the principle of 鈥渙ne province, onepolicy鈥 . The reform and restructuring plans of Jinzhou Bank and Hengfeng Bankwere carried out smoothly. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuouslydeepened. The PBC comprehensively promoted implementation of the reform plansfor development and policy financial institutions in terms of redefining the scope ofbusiness, promoting the improvement of corporate governance, and strengtheningcapital constraints. The PBC will continue to guide policy financial institutions tostick to their responsibilities and business scope and to give full play to their role insupporting key areas and weak links in the national economy during the critical period, while strengthening risk prevention and control so as to better serve nationaldevelopment strategies. Plans were made in advance and efforts were made to properly deal with therisks of a prospective rise in non-performing loans in the banking industry dueto the impact of COVID-19. COVID-19 has impacted China's economic and socialdevelopment, and has put some downward pressures on the quality of banks鈥  creditassets. As there is a time lag in the reflection of non-performing loans, it is estimatedthat non-performing loans will successively emerge and increase over the upcoming period. The PBC and the CBIRC, together with relevant departments, guided thecommercial banks to conduct stress tests and actively made response plans withregard to the rise of non-performing loans due to the impact of COVID-19. Commercial banks were supported and encouraged to consider changes in thesituation on a dynamic basis, to adopt forward-looking measures, and to reasonablyutilize financial resources. In addition, loss provisions on and write-offs ofnon-performing loans were enhanced in a bid to properly cope with the risks of aprospective rise in non-performing loans due to the impact of COVID-19 and toenhance the capability to withstand risks and serve the real economy. Box 3 Review of the Risk Resolution of Baoshang BankOn May 24, 2019, Baoshang Bank (BSB) was taken over by the PBC and the CBIRCdue to serious credit risks. The working group for the takeover fully executed thebusiness management rights on the BSB and entrusted the China Construction BankCorporation (CCB) to handle its business operations. The risk resolution of the BSBwas steadily promoted for more than one year, and it is now reaching a conclusion. 1. Efforts have been made to appropriately guarantee the creditors鈥  rightsOn the day of the takeover, the BSB had a total of about 4,731,600 clients. Specifically, its personal clients totaled 4,667,700, while enterprises and interbankinstitutional clients amounted to 63,600. The number of clients the BSB serves isquite large, with corporate and interbank clients spreading across the country. Once itis unable to repay its debts on time, a series of chain reactions such as bank runs andfinancial market fluctuations are likely to occur. In order to ensure maximumprotection of the legitimate rights and interests of depositors and other creditors, andto safeguard financial and social stability, after a thorough study, the PBC and theCBIRC decided to have the Deposit Insurance Fund and the PBC provide funds, guaranteeing the principal and interest of personal deposits and the creditor鈥檚 rights ofmost of the institutions to the full amount. Meanwhile, to strengthen market disciplineand gradually break the expectation of rigid repayment while taking into account theacceptability of market entities, 90 percent of large-denomination creditor's rights hasbeen guaranteed on average. Overall, the extent to which the principal and interest ofindividuals and institutions is guaranteed is appropriate, which is not only higher thanthat during the comprehensive management of securities companies in 2004 but alsorelatively high concerning the risk resolution of the same type of internationalinstitutions. 2. Assets and capital verification have been comprehensively conducted In June 2019, to get a clear picture of the BSB, the working group hired anintermediary in a market-based manner to verify the corporate and interbankbusinesses of the BSB on a deal-by-deal basis. Checkups on the assets and liabilities, account clarification, re-evaluation, and capital verification were conducted, in a bidto fully understand the asset conditions, financial position, and business operations ofthe BSB. On the one hand, the results of the assets and capital verification confirmedthat the BSB was faced with huge risks of insolvency and serious credit risks hadalready emerged during the takeover. Without the injection of public funds, the ratioof ordinary guaranteed creditors鈥  rights would be theoretically less than 60 percent. On the other hand, the results have established a solid foundation for subsequentlypromoting the reform and restructuring of the BSB by the working group. 3. Reforms and restructuring of the BSB have been promotedIn October 2019, the reforms and restructuring of the BSB officially began. In orderto minimize the disposal costs, the working group originally hoped that byintroducing strategic investors, and under the precondition of the governmentdepartments not providing public funds for sharing losses, the fund shortages incurredby the BSB鈥檚 insolvency would be compensated for only by the premium of equityacquisition. However, due to the huge loss gap, no strategic investors were willing toparticipate in the restructuring of the BSB unless public funds covered the losses. Toensure the uninterrupted provision of financial services during the reform andrestructuring of the BSB, with the international experience and practices of financialrisk resolution drawn upon, the PBC and the CBIRC finally decided to establish anew bank under the current framework of laws and regulations at home to acquire theBSB so as to promote its reform and restructuring. In the meantime, to guarantee theliquidity safety of the BSB, the PBC provided liquidity support totaling RMB23.5billion to the BSB through a standing lending facility since the takeover, uponacceptance of high-quality collaterals in full amount. In January 2020, the working group entrusted the Beijing Financial Assets Exchange, in accordance with the market-based principle, chose Huishang Bank to acquire thefour BSB branches outside the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, and ascertainedthe subscription quota and share price for the shareholders of the newly-establishedbank, namely, Mengshang Bank. On April 30, 2020, Mengshang Bank was officially established and started itsbusiness operations. On the same day, the Announcement on the Transfer of RelevantBusinesses, Assets, and Liabilities of Baoshang Bank Co., Ltd. was issued by theworking group on the BSB鈥檚 takeover, clarifying that businesses, assets, and liabilitiesof the BSB will be transferred to Mengshang Bank and Huishang Bank, respectively. According to the eighteenth clause of the Deposit Insurance Regulations, the Deposit Insurance Fund will provide fund support for the above-mentioned two banks and willshare responsibility for covering the asset impairment losses of the former BSB, so asto promote the successful acquisition of the BSB by the two banks and to ensure theirsmooth transition to normal operations. 4. Work plan for the next periodAccording to the asset and capital verification results that the former BSB facessevere insolvency, a bankruptcy petition will be filed for the BSB, and liquidation onthe equities of the former shareholders and unguaranteed claims will be conducted ina law-based manner. In addition, the relevant departments are in the process ofholding people concerned accountable based on laws and regulations. XI. Deepening the reforms of foreign exchange administrationForeign exchange administration for trade in goods was further improved. First, measures were taken to guarantee that supplies necessary for battling COVID-19 anddonation funds were put in place in a timely manner. From January 27 to end-Q2 2020, a total of 14,000 foreign exchange receipts and payments under trade in goods wereexpedited across the country through the green channel, totaling USD4.9 billion. Second, the pilot program for facilitating foreign exchange receipts and paymentsunder trade in goods was expanded. By end-Q2 2020, a total of 117,000 foreignexchange receipts and payments were processed under all the pilot programs for 248pilot enterprises in 12 places across the nation, amounting to USD80.9 billion. Third, financial support for the real economy was stepped up. Registration for returnedforeign exchange remittances below USD50,000 was canceled. By end-Q2 2020, atotal of 1,304 cases of returned remittances had been exempt from registration, worthUSD31.2 million. Fourth, innovative development of new forms of trade was boosted. The Circular of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on Supporting theDevelopment of New Forms of Trade (Huifa No.11 [2020]) was issued, optimizingforeign exchange receipts and payments for comprehensive foreign trade serviceproviders and enterprises engaged in cross-border e-commerce.By end-Q2 2020, fourbanks witnessing completed transactions had cumulatively received foreign exchangeworth USD8.07 million, involving 242,000 small orders of 1,498 small and microbusinesses. Cross-border financing and investment were further facilitated. First, cross-border trade and investment facilitation was enhanced. In April 2020, theCircular of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on Optimizing ForeignExchange Administration to Support Foreign-related Business Growth (Huifa No.8[2020]) was released. It simplified operational procedures for foreign exchange businesses, improved foreign exchange services, and promoted the high-qualitygrowth of the foreign-related economy. Second, the limits on the investment quota offoreign institutional investors were lifted. In May 2020, the Regulations on ManagingFunds of Securities and Futures Investments by Foreign Institutional Investors (PBC& SAFE Announcement No.2 [2020]) were issued. They standardized and simplifiedthe administrative requirements for managing funds of securities and futuresinvestments by foreign institutional investors so as to better facilitate the participationof foreign investors in China鈥檚 financial market. Stability in the foreign exchange market was maintained. With regular pandemiccontainment measures remaining in place, efforts were made to coordinate pandemiccontainment with prevention and resolution of financial risks. Monitoring andanalysis of potential risks incurred by cross-border capital flows were strengthened. Emphasis was placed on cracking down on illegal financial activities, such asunderground banks, cross-border gambling, and illegal online foreign exchangetrading. These measures were all aimed at earnestly maintaining order in the foreignexchange market and forestalling and defusing risks of cross-border capital flows soas to ensure stability on six fronts and to maintain security in six areas. In H1 2020, atotal of 714 cases violating the laws and regulations of foreign exchangeadministration were handled, with the total fines amounting to RMB239 million. Part 3. Financial Market ConditionsIn H1 2020, the financial market operated generally smoothly. Money markettransactions were active. The coupon rates of all types of bonds declined, and thevolume of cash bond transactions and issuances expanded. The stock market indicesrebounded from Q1 2020, and the turnover witnessed a year-on-year rise. I. Financial market overview1. Money market transactions were activeMoney market interest rates went down in March and April, followed by a rally inMay. Interest rates generally remained stable within a reasonable range. In June 2020, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending and pledged reposposted 1.85 percent and 1.89 percent respectively, both up 45 basis points from March2020. The monthly weighted average interest rate for government-backed bond reposamong depository institutions posted 1.75 percent, 14 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. At end-June, the overnightand 7-day Shibor posted 1.79 percent and 2.23 percent respectively, up 17 and 8 basispoints from end-March, respectively. The market saw active repo transactions and interbank lending. In H1 2020, thetrading volume of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB471.2 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.9 trillion and a year-on-year increaseof 18.9 percent. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending registeredRMB78.4 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB648.3 billion and ayear-on-year decrease of 5.2 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnightrepos and overnight lending accounted for 84.8 percent and 90.6 percent, respectively, of the total turnover in bond repos and interbank lending, decreasing 0.1 percentagepoints and 1.5 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos traded on theexchange markets increased 11.5 percent year on year to RMB128.5 trillion. The interbank CD and negotiable CD businesses witnessed orderly development. InH1 2020, a total of 13,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raisingRMB7.8 trillion. The trading volume on the secondary market totaled RMB85.9trillion. At end-June, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB10.3 trillion. In H12020, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.21 percent, 16 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 31,000 negotiableCDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB6.0 trillion, with a decrease ofRMB1.2 trillion year on year. Interest rate swaps were active. In H1 2020, the RMB interest rate swap marketwitnessed 144,363 transactions, increasing 26.7 percent year on year, with the volumeof the notional principal totaling RMB9.9 trillion, an increase of 19.1 percent year onyear. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one yeartraded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB6.0 trillion, accounting for 60.9 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing reporate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMBinterest rate swaps, accounting for 80.3 percent and 16.9 percent, respectively, of thetotal notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In H1 2020, interest rate swapsanchored to the LPR further increased to 995 transactions with RMB169.47 billion ofthe notional principal. The LPR interest rate option business developed steadily. Since the LPR interest rateoption business made its debut on the interbank market on March 23, it attractedactive participation of market players, covering large commercial banks, joint-stockcommercial banks, city commercial banks, rural commercial banks, foreign-fundedbanks, securities companies, and so forth. From March to June 2020, a total of 266interest rate option transactions were concluded, adding up to RMB44.66 billion. Specifically, 110 LPR interest rate swaption transactions were concluded, adding upto RMB10.33 billion of the notional principal, and 156 were LPR interest ratecap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB34.33 billion of the notional principal. 2. The coupon rate of bonds retreated remarkably, while the transactions andissuance of cash bonds expandedThe government bond yields picked up in Q2. At end-June, the yields of 10-year and1-year government bonds posted 2.82 percent and 2.18 percent, respectively, increasing by 23 basis points and 49 basis points, respectively, from end-March. The coupon rates of bonds retreated remarkably. The coupon rate of 10-yeargovernment bonds issued in June 2020 was 2.68 percent, 61 basis points lower thanthe rate in June 2019. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by ChinaDevelopment Bank was 3.08 percent, 51 basis points lower than the rate in June 2019. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued byAAA-rated non-financial enterprises was 2.36 percent, 136 basis points lower than therate in June 2019. The volume of cash bond transactions continued to grow. In H1 2020, the value ofcash bond trading on the bond market posted RMB127.76 trillion, registering anincrease of 28.8 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bond trading onthe interbank market was RMB119.67 trillion, representing an average daily turnoverof RMB989.0 billion and an increase of 25.7 percent year on year. The value of cashbond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB8.08 trillion, registering anaverage daily turnover of RMB69.1 billion, with an increase of 103.9 percent year onyear. The value of bond lending transactions stood at RMB3.16 trillion, with anincrease of 50.1 percent year on year. The volume of bond issuances has seen year-on-year growth. In H1 2020, thecumulative volume of bond issuances totaled RMB26 trillion, RMB4.6 trillion morethan that in H1 2019. Specifically, the issuance of corporate debenture bondsexceeded RMB1.6 trillion in March as well as in April, and the increase in netfinancing of H1 2020 was RMB1.5 trillion more than that in H1 2019. At end-June, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB107.8 trillion. 3. Bill financing continued to rise, and interest rates in the bill market remainedrelatively stableThe bill acceptance business continued to grow. In H1 2020, commercial drafts issuedby enterprises totaled RMB11.7 trillion, rising 16.6 percent year on year. At end-June, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.2 trillion, increasing 15.3 percent yearon year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances continued to expand steadily byRMB1.5 trillion from the beginning of the year and by RMB767.5 billion fromend-March. At end-June, 71.2 percent of the outstanding bankers鈥  acceptances wereissued by MSMEs. Bill financing continued to expand. In H1 2020, total discounts by financialinstitutions amounted to RMB22.1 trillion, growing 19.0 percent year on year. At end-June, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.6 trillion, up 23.3 percent year onyear. The balance accounted for 5.2 percent of the total outstanding loans, 0.4percentage points higher than the percentage during the same period of the previousyear. In Q2 2020, interest rates in the bill market rebounded after a decline. 4. The stock market continued to rally, with turnover increasing year on yearStock indices rebounded. At end-June, the Shanghai Stock Exchange CompositeIndex closed at 2,985 points, increasing 8.5 percent from end-March. The ShenzhenStock Exchange Component Index closed at 11,992 points, increasing 20.4 percentfrom end-March. Turnover on the stock markets rose significantly. In H1 2020, thecombined turnover of Shanghai Stock Exchange and Shenzhen Stock Exchangereached RMB89 trillion and the average daily turnover was RMB760.3 billion, withan increase of 29 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stockmarkets declined year on year. In H1 2020, a cumulative RMB333.9 billion wasraised, decreasing 8.7 percent year on year. 5. Growth of premium income slowed down, while growth of assets in theinsurance sector acceleratedIn H1 2020, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB2.7trillion, with a year-on-year increase of 6.5 percent, 5.7 percentage points lower thanthe growth rate in 2019. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB630.8 billion, with ayear-on-year increase of 1.2 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claim andbenefit payments increased 2.3 percent year on year, and total life insurance claim andbenefit payments grew 0.3 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-June, total assets inthe insurance industry increased 12.7 percent year on year to RMB22 trillion, anacceleration of 0.5 percentage points from end-2019. Specifically, bank depositsincreased 6.9 percent year on year and investment-linked assets expanded 17.5percent year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions fell year on yearIn H1 2020, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactionsregistered USD3.4 trillion, a decrease of 14.3 percent year on year. The cumulativeturnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD7.3 trillion, adecrease of 17.4 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USDswap transactions posted USD4.1 trillion, accounting for 55.9 percent of the totalswap turnover. Turnover of the RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaledUSD51.3 billion, rising 19.9 percent year on year. Turnover in foreign currency pairtransactions totaled USD308.5 billion, rising 34.4 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 61.7 percentof the total market share. Participants in the foreign exchange market expanded further. At end-June, there were722 members in the foreign exchange spot market, 256 members in the foreignexchange forward market, 250 members in the foreign exchange swap market, 207members in the currency swap market, and 156 members in the foreign exchangeoptions market. There were 30 market makers in the spot market and 27 marketmakers in the forward and swap markets. 7. The gold market operated steadily with an overall rise in pricesGold prices witnessed an overall increase. At end-June, international gold pricesclosed at USD1,768.1 per ounce, representing a gain of 16.09 percent from end-2019. The Au99.99 on Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB397.76 per gram, increasing16.71 percent from end-2019. In H1 2020, the volume of gold traded on ShanghaiGold Exchange was 33,800 tons, representing a rise of 13.28 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB12.43 trillion, increasing 44.03 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market and the bill marketOn June 24, 2020, the PBC, together with other relevant departments, issued the Notice of the People's Bank of China, the National Development and ReformCommission, and the China Securities Regulatory Commission on Issues ConcerningDisposal of Defaults on Corporate Debenture Bonds, in order to promotemarket-oriented and law-based disposal of defaults on the bond market. On June 28, 2020, the PBC released the Administrative Measures on DepositoryPaper, for the purposes of regulating the financing mechanism of depository papersand improving services to SMEs and supply chain financing. Depository papersconnect the bill market with the bond market, and the professional pricing andinvesting capacity of the bond market can be fully leveraged in a way that improvesthe standardization of bill transactions and enhances the financing function of bills. 2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities andfutures industryCapital market reform was further deepened. First, in June, the CSRC released threesets of institutional rules on the reforms and the pilot registration-based system for theChiNext market, which specified the qualifications, registration procedures, andinformation disclosure requirements for the IPO on the ChiNext market. Specifically, the issuance verification and listing procedure were improved with stricterinformation disclosure requirements. It was also clarified that when a ChiNext-listedcompany engages in a M&A and reorganization that involves stock issuances, it shallbe carried out in a registration-based approach. Second, in June, the CSRC releasedthe Guiding Opinions on the Transfer of Companies Listed on the National Equitiesand Exchange Quotations (NEEQ) for Listing on Other Boards, which stipulates thatif a company has been listed on the NEEQ Select for at least one consecutive year, itcan apply for a transfer of listing board to the ChiNext market or the STAR market. Third, in April, the CSRC released the Announcement on the Relevant Arrangementsfor the Innovative Pilot Program of Domestic Listing of Red-chip Enterprises, whichrelaxed the market value requirements for red-chip enterprises to be listeddomestically. The businesses of securities institutions were further regularized. First, in April, theCSRC released the Guidelines for Public Offerings of Securities Investment Funds toInvest in Stocks Listed on the NEEQ, allowing equity funds, hybrid funds, and otherapproved publicly offered funds to invest in the stocks listed on the NEEQ Select. Second, in May, the CSRC released the Decision on Revising the Provisions on theAdministration of Subordinated Debts of Securities Companies, which allowedsecurities companies to publicly issue subordinated debts, supported securitiescompanies in issuing write-down bonds, contingent convertible bonds, and otherinnovative instruments, and unified the scope of institutional investors. Third, in June, the CSRC released the Administrative Measures on the Sponsor Business of Securities Issuances and Listings, which revised the contents related to the underwriting andsponsoring business of securities companies and clarified the self-regulatoryresponsibilities of stock exchanges. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance marketThe requirements for insurance funds to invest in bank capital replenishment bondswere relaxed. On May 20, 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Issues ConcerningInsurance Fund Investments in Bank Capital Replenishment Bonds, which relaxed therequirements for the issuers of capital replenishment bonds that insurance funds caninvest in and lifted the requirements of external credit ratings for the bonds to investin. Insurance funds were supported to participate in treasury bond futures trading. OnJune 23, 2020, the CBIRC released the Provisions on Insurance Funds Participatingin Treasury Bond Futures Trading and, in the meantime, it revised the Measures forInsurance Funds to Participate in Financial Derivatives Trading and the Provisionson Insurance Funds to Participate in Stock Index Futures Trading. It was specifiedthat risk hedging shall be the the purpose of insurance funds to participate in thetrading of treasury bond futures and stock index futures. 鈥淟ooking back鈥  actions were taken to rectify market disorder in the insurance industry. On June 23, 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Carrying Out 鈥淟ooking Back鈥  Actions to Rectify Market Disorder in the Banking and Insurance Industries, whichclearly stated the priorities of the work to rectify market disorder. Part 4. Macroeconomic OverviewI. Global economic and financial developments1. Economic and financial market performance in the major economiesThe COVID-19 took a toll on the global economy in the first half of 2020. Withprogress in reopening, economic indicators in some economies improved gradually. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) further revised down its global growthforecast for 2020 to 鈥 4.9 percent in June, down 1.9 percentage points from the Aprilforecast. Due to the fallout from the pandemic, the major economies saw slower growth in Q1. The quarter-on-quarter GDP growth fell into negative territory in theUS, the euro area, Japan, and the U.K., while year-on-year GDP growth in Brazil, India, Russia, and South Africa posted 鈥 0.25 percent, 3.09 percent, 1.6 percent, and鈥 0.1 percent, respectively. In mid-April, the economy showed signs of improvementas a number of countries announced a phased and gradual approach in relaxinglockdown measures and promoted reopening. The Purchasing Managers鈥  Index (PMI)rose across the board toward the middle of this year. The manufacturing PMI in theUS, Turkey, and Brazil all rebounded to above 50 and unemployment pressures eased. International financial market volatility increased. The stock market saw a V-shapedrally, and the US dollar liquidity strains moderated. From March to April, the US DowJones Industrial Average Index and other stock indexes plunged amid the spread ofCOVID-19. However, major stock indexes in the US, Germany, Japan, and the U.K. had rebounded swiftly since May, with the Nasdaq hitting a record high this year. InQ2, global dollar liquidity strains eased, as the US Federal Reserve (Fed) expanded itsbalance sheet significantly. As of June 30, the 1-year US dollar Libor was 0.55percent, shedding 45 basis points (bps) from end-March, while the 1-year Euribor was 鈥 0.23 percent, dipping 6 bps from end-March. 2. Monetary policy of major economiesCentral banks in the major economies maintained interest rates at low levels andscaled up asset purchases. Central banks in the advanced economies, such as the USFed, the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England (BOE), and the Bank ofJapan (BOJ), kept their low interest rates unchanged since Q2. The balance sheets ofthe US Fed, ECB, and BOE expanded quickly as they substantially increased the sizeof their asset purchase programs. The US Fed, ECB, and the central banks in other major advanced economiesintroduced structural emergency liquidity facilities. The US Fed created a number ofstructural tools, such as the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility sinceApril, and adjusted these tools several times to better support pandemic-hit businessesand local governments. The ECB announced pandemic emergency longer-termrefinancing operations and further expanded the pandemic emergency purchaseprogram. Central banks in the emerging market economies continued their rate cuts. In Q2, thecentral banks in Brazil, Russia, Turkey, and South Africa cut rates by a total of 150bps respectively on two occasions, while the Mexican central bank reduced rates threetimes by a total of 150 bps. The Reserve Bank of India, Bank of Korea, and BankIndonesia lowered the benchmark rate by 40 bps, 25 bps, and 25 bps, respectively. Box 4 How to Look at Low Global Interest RateGlobal interest rates have been declining since the 1980s. In the wake of the 2008global financial crisis, the major economies implemented large-scale quantitativeeasing (QE), and some economies also adopted a negative interest rate policy, whichfurther reduced the interest rates. Since the second half of 2019, given the increasingeconomic downside risks and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, central banksaround the world have returned to the easing mode, starting a wave of policy rate cuts. The low interest rate policy has again been transmitted to the financial market wherebond rates have fallen sharply, bonds carrying negative interest rates have expandedrapidly in size, and deposit and lending interest rates have also been impacted. At theend of June 2020, the 10-year government bond yields in the US, Germany, UK, andJapan were 0.66, 鈥 0.5, 0.21, and 0.04 percent respectively, which were down by about 340, 500, 430, and 150 basis points from end-2007, significantly lower than the levelbefore the 2008 global financial crisis and a sharp drop of about 10 percentage pointsfrom the 1981 high. Apart from policy factors, long-term structural factors, such as the decline inpotential economic growth, are the main drivers behind the low global interestrates. From the perspective of real interest rates, the equilibrium interest rate level ismainly related to potential economic growth. Due to the slowing technologicalprogress, the uneven distribution of wealth worldwide, the widening income gap, aging, and the imbalanced industrial structure, the willingness of the advancedeconomies to consume and invest has weakened and the potential economic growthrate has declined. The corresponding equilibrium interest rates, namely the actualneutral interest rates, have come down as well. According to World Bank statistics, in2019 the proportion of the population over 65 years old in the US, the EuropeanUnion, and Japan was 16.2, 20.5, and 28 percent respectively, an increase of 3.7, 3.3, and 7.3 percentage points from 2007. From the perspective of nominal interest rates, long-term inflation and inflation expectation volatility have decreased since the 1980s, which also led nominal interest rates to decline significantly at a pace even greaterthan the real interest rates. Given the lower actual neutral interest rates and the subdued inflation, someadvanced economies have adopted zero or even a negative interest rate policy. However, the low interest rate policy has not worked as expected, and its effectsremain to be seen. Neutral interest rates are an important yardstick in formulatingmonetary policy. In the long run, the interest rate level should remain near the sum ofthe actual neutral interest rates and the inflation targets. Even with the low interestrate policy, inflation in the advanced economies has long been lower than the inflationtargets of the central banks. This can be attributed to three main reasons. First, the low interest rate policy has a limited effect on long-term structural factors, and it isdifficult to change the long-term downward trend of potential economic growth andneutral interest rates. Second, considering that deposit interest rates cannot effectivelybreak through a zero interest rate, the low interest rate policy increases the downwardpressure on the banks鈥  profits and consequently monetary policy cannot be smoothlytransmitted through the banking system in some economies. Studies have shown thatif the policy rate declines and hits the 鈥渞eversal interest rate,鈥  the critical interest rateat which the effects of an accommodative monetary policy will reverse, the excessivenarrowing of interest margins, and the decline in profits may lead commercial banksto cut credits, causing a tightening effect instead. Third, in a low interest rateenvironment, if the policy rate is cut too quickly, it may trigger a Neo-Fisherian effect. Interest rates will fall simultaneously with inflation expectations, while real interestrates will remain unchanged, which will converge toward the liquidity trap andmonetary easing will become ineffective. Excessively low interest rates will also have many negative impacts, such asresource misallocations and funds flowing out of the real economy to the virtualeconomy. First, excessively low interest rates will reduce the efficiency of financialresource allocations and aggravate structural distortions. Interest rates are thetouchstone of market capital allocations. If interest rates are too low, massive fundsmay flow to zombie companies, which will intensify the problem of rising corporatedebt and overcapacity and will hinder technological innovation as well as industrialupgrading and transformation. Second, interest rates that are too low tend toencourage risk-taking behavior and excessive leveraging of financial institutions, which will increase the vulnerability of the financial system. Third, interest rates thatare too low will divert funds from the real economy to the virtual economy. Fundsreleased by a loose monetary policy will increasingly flow to the asset market. Withthe deepening of global economic and financial integration, the spillover and spillbackeffects of monetary policy have become increasingly notable. The low interest ratesand the QE in the major economies may increase risks associated with cross-bordercapital flows and foreign exchange markets to other economies, and heighten thevolatility of financial market prices and exchange rates. At present, the limitations oflow interest rates have caused the monetary authorities in the advanced economies toreflect on and reassess their monetary policy framework. In the medium term, themajor economies will continue with their low interest rate policy, but there is limitedroom for policy rates to fall further. Since the beginning of 2020, the People's Bank of China (PBC) has beenimplementing a normal monetary policy and has maintained interest rates at levelscommensurate with China鈥檚 development stage and economic situation. As a result, the interest rate spread between domestic and foreign currencies has remained at anappropriate range and the attractiveness of RMB assets has increased. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, the pandemic containment and the economic reopening should be balancedbetter. Some economies may see a resurge in infections when they reopen theireconomies on a large scale before effectively containing the virus. Second, the risingrisk of insolvency in the corporate sector may trigger a wave of bankruptcy and creditdowngrading. The pandemic has pushed up the number of bankrupt businesses in theUS A number of big names have filed for bankruptcy. Companies in aviation andtourism-related industries are struggling. Third, the global leverage ratio hascontinued to rise. Lockdowns brought the economy to a halt, resulting in lowerincomes and higher debts in the household and corporate sectors. In the meantime, massive containment and bailout measures pushed up the short-term fiscal deficit andgovernment debt levels. The already-high global leverage ratio rose further. Fourth, risks are lurking in the financial markets. Investors are sensitive to expectedmovements in volatile financial markets. Any surprise may unnerve the market. Theemerging market economies need to remain alert to cross-border capital flows andexchange rate risks. According to the Institute of International Finance, the emergingmarkets saw an inflow of USD 32.9 billion into their capital markets in June. Fifth, external instabilities and uncertainties have increased markedly. Geopolitical tensionshave resurfaced and trade frictions among some countries are intensifying. II. Macroeconomic developments in ChinaIn H1 2020, facing the unexpected outbreak of COVID-19 and the complex domesticand international situations, China鈥檚 economy showed great resilience and witnessed agradual recovery, with work and production resumption improving month by monthand economic growth in Q2 remarkably outperforming expectations. According topreliminary statistics, the GDP in H1 dropped by 1.6 percent year on year on acomparable basis to RMB45.7 trillion, whereas the GDP in Q2 grew by 3.2 percentyear on year. In H1, the CPI rose by 3.8 percent year on year. 1. Consumption gradually improved, the decline of investment deceleratedremarkably, and imports and exports outperformed expectationsResidents鈥  income in nominal terms grew marginally and their willingness to consumegradually improved. In H1, per capita disposable income registered RMB15,666, up2.4 percent year on year in nominal terms. It dropped by 1.3 percent in real terms yearon year鈥攁 decline that was slower than that of GDP. The income distributionstructure continued to improve, with the ratio of the per capita income of urbanresidents to that of rural residents narrowing. According to the Urban Depositors鈥  Survey conducted by the PBC in Q2, the Income Sentiment Index reached 46.1percent, up 4.5 percentage points from the previous quarter; 23.4 percent of residentswere inclined to 鈥渃onsume more,鈥  up 1.3 percentage points from the previous quarter. In H1, total retail sales of consumer goods registered RMB17.2 trillion, down 11.4percent year on year, decelerating by 7.6 percentage points from the previous quarter. Retail sales of consumer goods in the rural areas witnessed a faster recovery than those in the urban areas, and sales of upgraded consumer goods grew rapidly. Onlineretail sales showed sound growth momentum. In H1, national online retail sales grewby 7.3 percent year on year to RMB5.2 trillion. The decline of fixed-asset investments decelerated remarkably, while investments inthe high-tech industry and social areas rallied. In H1, fixed-asset investments(excluding those by rural households) decreased by 3.1 percent year on year toRMB28.2 trillion, decelerating by 3.2 percentage points and 13.0 percentage pointscompared with that from January to May and that in Q1 respectively. Currentinvestments have exhibited the following characteristics. First, investments in realestate development rebounded rapidly, while those in the manufacturing industrypicked up slowly. In H1, the year-on-year growth of investments in real estatedevelopment and the manufacturing industry registered 1.9 percent and 鈥 11.7 percentrespectively, up 2.2 percentage points and 3.1 percentage points respectivelycompared with that from January to May. Second, investments in the high-techindustry rebounded rapidly. Investments in the high-tech manufacturing industry grewby 6.3 percent year on year in H1, while those in Q1 dropped by 12.1 percent. Third, investments in the social areas rallied, increasing by 5.3 percent year on year in H1and dropping by 8.8 percent in Q1. Specifically, investments in the health industrygrew by 15.2 percent year on year in H1, while those in Q1 edged down by 0.9percent. Investments in the education industry grew by 10.8 percent year on year, while those in Q1 dropped by 4.0 percent. Imports and exports outperformed expectations and the trade structure continued toimprove. In H1, imports and exports dropped by 3.2 percent year on year, deceleratingby 3.3 percentage points from Q1. In H1, RMB-denominated exports dropped by 3.0percent year on year to RMB7.7 trillion, while RMB-denominated imports droppedby 3.3 percent to RMB6.5 trillion, leading to a trade surplus of RMB1.2 trillion. China鈥檚 foreign trade gradually stabilized and picked up after fluctuations in Q1. Specifically, exports maintained positive growth for three consecutive months fromApril to June, and the growth of imports turned positive in June. In terms of trademodes, the trade structure continued to improve, with the share of general trade intotal imports and exports increasing. In terms of the commodity structure, theproportion of exports of machinery and electronics increased, and exports of suppliesrelated to the pandemic containment as well as products related to the 鈥渟tay-at-homeeconomy鈥  grew rapidly, driving the stabilization and recovery of foreign trade in Q2. In terms of trade partners, ASEAN became China鈥檚 largest trade partner, accountingfor 14.7 percent of the total foreign trade volume in China. Foreign direct investment (FDI) continued to concentrate in the high-tech industry. InH1, actually utilized FDI decreased by 1.3 percent year on year to RMB472.18 billion, decelerating by 9.5 percentage points from Q1, thus demonstrating a steady upturn inforeign investors鈥  expectations and confidence. In terms of the industrial distribution, the concentration of FDI in the high-tech industry accelerated. In H1, actually utilized foreign investment in the high-tech service industry grew by 19.2 percent year onyear. In H1, non-financial outward direct investments by domestic investors edged down by0.7 percent year on year to RMB362.14 billion (equivalent to USD51.5 billion). Specifically, investments worth USD8.12 billion went to the countries along the Beltand Road, up 19.4 percent year on year. The industrial structure of outwardinvestments continued to improve. Outward investments mainly flowed to theleasing/commercial services industry, manufacturing industry, wholesale/retailindustry, mining industry, construction industry, and other industries. 2. Agricultural production was fairly satisfactory, industrial productionrecovered rapidly, and the decline of the service industry deceleratedIn H1, primary industry grew by 0.9 percent year on year, accounting for 5.7 percentof GDP. The secondary and tertiary industries dropped by 1.9 percent and 1.6 percentrespectively, accounting for 37.8 percent and 56.5 percent of GDP. Specifically, in Q2, the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 3.3 percent, 4.7 percent, and1.9 percent year on year, with secondary industry rebounding at a faster pace thantertiary industry. Agricultural production was fairly satisfactory. The total output of summer crops grewby 0.9 percent year on year to 142.81 million tons, registering an increase of 1.21million tons from the previous year. The agricultural planting structure continued toimprove, with the sowing areas of rape seeds and other cash crops increasing. Hogproduction capacity continued to rebound. At end-Q2, hogs in stock grew by 5.8percent to 339.96 million from end-Q1. Industrial production recovered rapidly. In H1, the value-added of IndustrialEnterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) decreased by 1.3 percent year on year, decelerating by 7.1 percentage points from Q1. Specifically, IEDS grew by 4.4percent in Q2, and fell by 8.4 percent in Q1. In H1, total profits of IEDS dropped by12.8 percent year on year, with the decline continuing to decelerate. Specifically, totalprofits of IEDS grew by 11.5 percent year on year in June, accelerating by 5.5percentage points from May. According to a survey conducted in Q2 by the PBC on5,000 entrepreneurs, the Business Climate Index posted 42.7 percent, up 12.4percentage points from Q1. The Profitability Index registered 49.6 percent, up 27.3percentage points from Q1. The decline in the service industry decelerated, and the modern service industryshowed sound growth momentum. In H1, the year-on-year decline of the value-addedof tertiary industry decelerated by 3.6 percentage points from Q1. Specifically, thevalue-added of tertiary industry grew by 1.9 percent year on year in Q2 and droppedby 5.2 percent in Q1. In H1, the Index of Service Production (ISP) fell by 6.1 percentyear on year, decelerating by 5.6 percentage points from Q1. Specifically, the index grew by 2.3 percent in June, accelerating by 1.3 percentage points from May. In June, the Commercial Activities Index for the service industry registered 53.4 percent, up1.1 percentage points from May. In terms of market expectations, the ExpectedBusiness Activities Index for the service industry reached 59.0 percent. 3. The growth of consumer prices decelerated, whereas the decline in producerprices accelerated compared with those in the previous quarterThe growth of consumer prices decelerated. In Q2, the CPI rose by 2.7 percent yearon year, decelerating by 2.2 percentage points from the previous quarter, with CPIgrowth in April, May, and June registering 3.3 percent, 2.4 percent, and 2.5 percentrespectively. In Q2, food prices grew by 12.2 percent year on year, decelerating by 8.1percentage points from the previous quarter. The growth of non-food pricesdecelerated slightly. Growth of consumer goods prices decelerated, while that ofservice prices remained stable. The decline of producer prices accelerated compared with the previous quarter. Due toits relatively higher base in the previous year, the Producer Price Index (PPI) in Q22020 dropped by 3.3 percent year on year, accelerating by 2.7 percentage pointscompared with the previous quarter. Specifically, the PPI in April, May, and Junedropped by 3.1 percent, 3.7 percent, and 3.0 percent year on year respectively, withthe decline in June decelerating. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products(PPIRM) fell by 4.4 percent year on year, accelerating by 3.6 percentage points fromthe previous quarter. In H1, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored bythe PBC decreased by 1.4 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.3 percentage pointsfrom the previous quarter. 4. The decline of fiscal revenue decelerated, and the employment situation wasgenerally stableIn H1, revenue in the national general public budget dropped by 10.8 percent year onyear to RMB9.6 trillion, decelerating by 3.5 percentage points compared with Q1. Expenditures in the national general budget saw a decline of 5.8 percent year on yearto RMB11.6 trillion, basically on par with those in Q1. Fiscal expenditures surpassedrevenue, leading to a deficit of RMB2.0 trillion, up RMB454.2 billion year on year. In terms of the revenue structure, tax revenue amounted to RMB8.2 trillion, down11.3 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue reached RMB1.4186 trillion, down 8.0percent year on year. Specifically, the domestic value-added tax, domesticconsumption tax, and business income tax dropped by 19.1 percent, 9.0 percent, and7.2 percent year on year respectively, while the personal income tax and the stamp taxon securities trading increased by 2.5 percent and 16.0 percent year on yearrespectively. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures on disaster preventionand treatment/emergency management, resources exploration/industrial informationand other areas, and debt servicing grew rapidly, registering year-on-year growth of13.6 percent, 9.9 percent, and 9.8 percent respectively. In H1, budgetary revenue from nationwide government-managed funds decreased 1percent year on year. Specifically, revenue from land sales rose by 5.2 percent year onyear. Budgetary expenditures from nationwide government-managed funds increasedby 21.7 percent year on year. The employment situation was generally stable. At end-June, the surveyedunemployment rate in the urban areas was 5.7 percent, down 0.2 percentage pointsfrom the previous month, which was the second lowest rate in 2020. Specifically, thesurveyed unemployment rate among employees aged from 25 to 59 years old reached5.2 percent, 0.5 percentage points lower than that in the urban areas and 0.2percentage points lower than that in the previous month respectively. In H1, 5.64million people were newly employed, accomplishing 62.7 percent of the annual target. At end-Q2, the number of rural immigrants reached 177.52 million. According to theSurvey of Urban Depositors conducted by the PBC in Q2, residents鈥  employmentexpectations improved remarkably, with the Employment Expectation Index for Q2reaching 50.1 percent, up 2.8 percentage points from the previous quarter. 5. The balance of payments and external debtA basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. China鈥檚 currentaccount deficit stood at USD33.7 billion in Q1 2020. To be specific, the surplus intrade in goods was USD23.1 billion, whereas the deficit in trade in services wasUSD47 billion. Under the capital and financial account, the surplus in directinvestments reached USD16.3 billion. At end-June, foreign exchange reservesregistered USD3.1123 trillion, an increase of USD4.4 billion, or 0.14 percent, fromend-2019. At end-March, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in bothdomestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.0946 trillion. Among this, theshort-term external debt balance was USD1.2159 trillion, accounting for 58 percent ofthe total external debt balance. 6. Analysis by sector6.1 The real estate sectorIn H1 2020, nationwide housing prices overall remained stable. Housing sales andinvestments in real estate development recovered gradually from March. In June, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-handresidential housing prices increased by 4.9 percent and 2.2 percent year on year, both0.5 percentage points less than the growth rates at end-March. In H1 2020, the totalfloor area of sold units and housing sales decreased by 8.4 percent and 5.4 percentyear on year respectively. Investments in real estate development stood at RMB6.3trillion, up 1.9 percent year on year and an acceleration of 9.6 percentage points fromQ1. Specifically, investments in residential housing development reached RMB4.6trillion, up 2.6 percent year on year and an acceleration of 9.8 percentage points fromQ1, which accounted for 73.8 percent of total investments in real estate development. Growth of real estate loans was stable but with a weaker momentum. At end-June, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-fundedfinancial institutions) stood at RMB47.4 trillion, up 13.1 percent year on year and adeceleration of 0.8 percentage points from end-March. Outstanding real estate loansmade up 28.7 percent of the total lending balance at end-June. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans amounted to RMB32.5 trillion, up 15.7 percentyear on year, representing a deceleration of 0.2 percentage points from end-March. Outstanding housing development loans posted RMB9.1 trillion, rising by 12.0percent year on year and a deceleration of 1.6 percentage points from end-March. 6.2 The catering sectorWith the increasing personal income, the accelerating pace of life, and the changingconsumption concepts, the demand for dining out grew and promoted the rapiddevelopment of the catering industry in China. First, the catering industry continuedto expand in size. In 2019, income in the catering industry totaled RMB4.67 trillion, up 9.4 percent year on year, which was 1.5 percentage points higher than that inretailing. Second, the job-creating capacity of the catering industry was furtherenhanced. According to the Communiqu茅 on China鈥檚 4th Economic Census, incorporated enterprises in the catering industry employed 4.234 million staff atend-2018, an increase by 8.8 percent from end-2013. Third, development of thecatering industry is increasingly integrated with information and smart technologies, with new business models emerging in succession, such as takeout and deliveryservices, smart restaurants, and unmanned restaurants. Fourth, food safety in thecatering industry showed an overall good momentum, with an initial atmosphere ofco-governance by government regulation, industry discipline, and public supervision. Nonetheless, the catering industry still faces some challenges and constraints inachieving sustainable and sound development. First, the catering industry is lacking chain store operations and operations of scale. In 2019, the income of cateringenterprises above a designated scale accounted for 20.2 percent of the entire cateringindustry nationwide, which had been declining for seven consecutive years since 2013. Second, the rising cost pressures of rent, labor, and raw materials, plus the fiercemarket competition due to the low entry threshold, squeeze the profit margins ofcatering enterprises. Third, service and management of the catering industry need tobe improved. The COVID-19 pandemic hit the catering industry significantly. With major strategicachievements in pandemic containment, China鈥檚 economy has been normalizing, which will promote the gradual recovery of the catering industry. In H1 2020, incomein the catering industry totaled RMB1.4609 trillion, down 32.8 percent year on year. In particular, the year-on-year decrease of income in Q2 was 23 percentage pointslower than that in Q1, which had improved for three consecutive months. Going forward, driven by the goal of meeting people鈥檚 aspirations for a better life, efforts should be made to improve the adaptability and flexibility of catering supply tochanges in demand on the basis of inheritance and innovation, and to promote thequality and efficiency of the catering industry. On the one hand, support policies incredit, rent, taxes, and fees should be enhanced to stimulate the vitality of cateringenterprises and to allow them to play a better role in ensuring job security and tosafeguard market entities. On the other hand, efforts should also be made to promotethe intensive use of information and smart technologies in the catering industry, tocultivate more large-scale chain brands, to improve service and management, and toenhance the competitiveness of catering enterprises. Part 5. Monetary Policy OutlookI. Outlook for the Chinese economySince the beginning of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has dealt a heavy blow toChina鈥檚 economic and social development. Under the strong leadership of theCPC Central Committee, the entire nation worked as one and achievedsignificant results in coordinating pandemic containment with economic andsocial development. China鈥檚 GDP recorded an annual growth of 3.2 percent inQ2, representing a rebound of 10 percentage points from Q1, which was muchhigher than expected. Looking beyond the near term, the fundamentals of steadyeconomic growth in the long run and high-quality development remainunchanged. The Chinese economy has demonstrated strong resilience. With pandemiccontainment measures remaining in place, economic and social activities havebasically returned to normal, thereby accelerating economic growth andrecovery. Currently, the pandemic containment and economic recovery in China isamong the fastest in the world, and the economic conditions have evolved from鈥渋nflicted supply and demand鈥  by the pandemic in Q1 to 鈥渞apidly recovering supplyand gradually improving demand鈥  in Q2. Market expectations are generally stable, and the economy is likely to resume its potential growth level in H2 2020. China鈥檚development is still and will continue to be for a long time at an important stage ofstrategic opportunities. The recent years have seen solid progress in fighting the鈥渢hree tough battles鈥  against major risks, poverty and pollution, along with deepenedsupply-side structural reforms, generally stable labor market conditions, steadygrowth of personal income, and continuous improvement in people鈥檚 livelihood. Newinfrastructure and new urbanization initiatives as well as major projects, such astransportation and water infrastructure, have been vigorously carried out, and newindustries, business models and growth drivers are taking shape and rapidlydeveloping. The proactive fiscal policy has been more impactful and the soundmonetary policy has been more flexible and appropriate. The financial sector hascontinuously enhanced its support for the real economy, especially for micro andsmall businesses (MSBs) and private enterprises. With prudent and decisive measuresto prevent and control financial risks, the financial system has been generally soundand capable of defusing various risks. The RMB exchange rate has been basicallystable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and the economy has strengthened itscapability to address external shocks. The world economy has fallen into a recession, and the domestic economy stillfaces many challenges. The global pandemic remains in a prolonged plateau phase, geopolitical tensions have started to rise, and trade frictions between some countriesare intensifying, causing major instabilities and uncertainties. According to forecastsby the IMF and the World Bank, the global economy will contract by 4.9 percent or5.2 percent in 2020. The World Bank projects that the global economy may sink intothe worst recession since World War II. As pressures are still great in terms ofimported pandemic case prevention and world economic risks, and the pandemic stillhas an impact on domestic economic conditions, the service sector, including catering, tourism and cultural entertainment, is facing a relatively slow recovery. To offset theimpact of the pandemic, countercyclical adjustments in H1 have increased, and themacro leverage ratio has revealed a temporary rise. But with the economic growthresuming its potential levels, the macro leverage ratio will gradually return toreasonable levels. With regard to structural, institutional and cyclical concerns in theeconomy, as well as prominent issues of uneven development and underdevelopment, it is necessary to take an objective and rational perspective, to remain confident andfocused and to enhance opportunity and risk awareness. The PBC will manage its ownaffairs well by combining reforms and macro-management and accommodating bothshort-term and long-term considerations as well as internal and external equilibria, soas to build an economy that is more competitive, innovative and risk-proof. The PBCwill firmly grasp the strategic basis of expanding domestic demand, vigorouslyprotect and stimulate the vitality of market entities, and ensure solid implementationof tasks regarding economic and social development. Consumer prices exhibit a smaller overall increase, and there are no grounds forpersistent inflation or deflation. The CPI鈥檚 year-on-year increase of above 5 percentat the beginning of 2020 was mainly due to the rapid rise in pork prices, added by theimpact of the pandemic on supply, and therefore possessed both structural andtime-specific characteristics. With multiple measures taken by governmentdepartments to guarantee supply and stabilize prices, monetary policy remained soundand the price increase steadily dropped to below 3 percent since February. Accordingto preliminary estimates, the average growth of the CPI in 2020 will fall into areasonable range. In addition, various commodity prices recovered to varying degreesin Q2. The PPI鈥檚 month-on-month growth turned positive, and the year-on-yeargrowth drop narrowed, which reflected the rebound in demand. However, the recentfloods in some provinces may affect the manufacture and transportation ofagricultural products, and the rapid increase in money supply in the advancedeconomies may push up commodity prices in the future. Furthermore, as the globalpandemic unfolds, in light of the uncertain impact of containment measures on supplychains and industry chains, it is necessary to pay close attention to the short-termprice fluctuations caused by various factors. From medium and long-termperspectives, China鈥檚 economic performance is generally stable, aggregate supply anddemand are basically in equilibrium, the supply-side structural reforms are being further carried out, the market mechanism is playing a better role, monetary policiesremain sound, and monetary conditions are reasonable and adequate, providing nogrounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stageUnder the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristicsfor a New Era, the PBC will resolutely implement the decisions and arrangements ofthe CPC Central Committee and the State Council, remain committed to achieving thetarget of completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and coordinate pandemic containment with economic and social development. Withpandemic response measures kept in place, the PBC will adhere to the guidingprinciple of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and will uphold the newdevelopment philosophy. Solid efforts will be made to ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domesticinvestment, and expectations, and to fully implement the tasks of maintaining securityin six areas, namely, employment, people's basic livelihoods, operations of marketentities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, and the normalfunctioning of primary-level governments, with the aim of achieving a decisivevictory in the tough battle against poverty and completing the building of amoderately prosperous society in all respects. The PBC will pursue a sound monetarypolicy that is more flexible, appropriate, and targeted, maintain the rational growth ofmoney supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE), and improvecross-cyclical policy design and adjustments. The relationship among stabilizinggrowth, safeguarding employment, adjusting the structure, preventing risks, andcontrolling inflation will be properly handled to achieve a long-term balance betweenstabilizing growth and preventing risks. The PBC will take measures in a moretargeted and timely way to manage the intensity, pace, and focus of monetary policyoperations in line with pandemic containment as well as economic and financialsituations. It will continue to attach higher priority to supporting the recovery of thereal economy and its sustainable development by using and launching a mix ofmonetary tools to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to smooth themechanism of monetary policy transmission. While the role of structural monetarypolicy tools in ensuring targeted liquidity provision will be effectively brought intoplay, efforts will be made to enable policy measures to provide more direct support forthe real economy, so as to help the real economy, particularly micro, small, andmedium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), pull through the difficulties and achieve stabledevelopment. Work will be done to guide expectations through multiple channels andkeep prices basically stable. Moreover, the PBC will deepen financial supply-sidestructural reforms, help foster a virtuous cycle and triangular interactions among thefinancial sector, the sci-tech sector, and industries, coordinate RMB and foreignexchange policies, and properly balance internal and external economic dynamics, sothat a new development pattern will be formed at a faster pace, where domestic and international circulations boost each other, with domestic circulation as the mainstay. First, the PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is more flexible, appropriate, and targeted. Based on the status of pandemic control and economicdevelopment, it will employ a mix of monetary policy tools to keep liquidity adequateat a reasonable level, guide the stable movement of market rates around open marketoperation rates and medium-term lending facility rates, and maintain the rationalgrowth of money supply and AFRE. Work will be done to match credit supply withthe financing needs of market entities, channel the stable flow of funds to the realeconomy, and support the economy to return to its potential growth rate. The capitalreplenishment mechanism will be improved to be sustainable so that banks will bebetter able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Byreducing overall financing costs, extending loans at preferential rates, and adoptingpolicies such as deferring principal and interest repayments for MSME loans, the PBCwill encourage the financial system to give up a reasonable part of its profits toenterprises. Additionally, the PBC will strengthen the synergy with the fiscal sector tofacilitate the issuance of government bonds and will join efforts with employment, industry, investment, and consumption policies. Second, to stabilize businesses and secure employment, the PBC will activelyexplore the propelling force of central bank lending and central bank discountsas well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the realeconomy. Continued efforts will be made to effectively implement the central banklending and central bank discount policy with a quota of RMB1 trillion. After windingup the RMB300 billion of special central bank lending and the RMB500 billion ofcentral bank lending and central bank discount quotas, the PBC will maintain policystability by providing inclusive and sustained financing support for agro-linkedenterprises, MSBs, private enterprises, and industries severely affected by thepandemic. Active steps will be taken to promote the two monetary policy tools thatprovide direct support for the real economy and to guide locally incorporated financialinstitutions to step up credit support for inclusive MSBs that keep their employmentbasically stable, so as to ensure that targeted adjustments will be more effective inserving the purpose of stabilizing businesses and securing employment. The supporttool for the deferral of inclusive MSB loan repayments will be used to substantiallyease the pressures on MSBs caused by principal and interest repayments and to tidethem over the difficulties. The support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loanswill be used to address the lack of collaterals and guaranties for MSBs and to increasethe share of unsecured MSB loans in a move to ease their financing strains. Third, the PBC will give play to the role of monetary and credit policies inpromoting economic structural adjustments so as to better serve the real economy. The required reserve policy framework featuring 鈥渢hree tranches and twopreferential treatments鈥  will be further enhanced so that a long-term mechanism ofincreasing bank loans to MSBs will be put in place and improved. By balancingshort-term and long-term goals and adopting a combination of policies, the PBC willpush forward with the project of enhancing the capacity of commercial banks toprovide financial services for MSMEs, and it will also take steps to improve thebanks鈥  internal credit resource allocations as well as assessments and incentives. Research will be conducted on the linkup between financial support for povertyeradication and rural revitalization policies to consolidate the achievements made inthe battle against poverty. Work will be accelerated to roll out measures for theassessment of commercial banks鈥  services for rural revitalization so as to guide theflow of financial resources accordingly. Measures will be taken to facilitateconnections between banks and manufacturing enterprises in a move to ramp upmedium and long-term financing support for the manufacturing sector. Firmlyadhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that thereal estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, as well as remaining committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices as well asexpectations, the PBC will maintain the continuity, consistency, and stability of realestate finance policies, and effectively implement the rules on prudential managementof real estate finance. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform andexchange rate reform to increase the efficiency of financial resource allocations. The loan prime rate (LPR) reform will move ahead. In line with market-oriented andlaw-based principles, the PBC will basically complete the shift in the pricingbenchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans by the end of August so as to smooththe transmission mechanism of monetary policy and further bring down overallfinancing costs by means of reform. It will make effective use of the self-regulatorymechanism for market rate pricing, regulate deposit rate pricing conduct, maintain thefairness of pricing, and urge financial institutions to strictly implement therequirement for explicit indications of annualized loan rates so as to protect the rightsand interests of consumers. Taking steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange ratereform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based onmarket supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, maintain theflexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and explore the role of the exchange rate inmacroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance ofpayments. Work will be done to stabilize market expectations and to keep the RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Steps will beaccelerated to develop the foreign exchange market and to provide services ofexchange rate risk management for import and export companies with authentic needs. Enterprises will be guided to be risk neutral in financial management and to manageexchange rate risks with foreign exchange derivatives. The PBC will steadily advancethe convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and promote freeuse of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment. Fifth, the PBC will improve the financial market system and enable financialmarkets to play an effective role in stabilizing growth, promoting structuraladjustments, advancing reform, and guarding against risks. More efforts will bemade to build a market-oriented, law-based, and internationalized bond market and toenhance the capacity of the bond market to serve the real economy throughinnovations driven by development. Measures will be taken to strengthen institutionbuilding by improving the bond market management system and pushing for theunification of standards so as to improve bond market efficiency. Support will beprovided for bond financing by private enterprises. The mechanism of bond defaultrisk prevention and resolution will be improved in line with market-oriented andlaw-based principles. The PBC will enhance regulatory coordination andinterconnectivity between financial market infrastructures, and push forward with thebuilding of custodian banks and trade repositories to ensure that financial markets aregenerally stable while performing safely and efficiently. Active but prudent steps willbe taken to promote the institutional and systemic opening-up of the bond market andto introduce more medium and long-term investors into the market. Sixth, the PBC will deepen financial supply-side structural reforms and improvethe modern financial system to make it highly adaptable, competitive, andinclusive. Reforms of financial institutions will be further pushed ahead. Work willcontinue to be done to deepen the reform of development financial institutions andpolicy financial institutions by setting strict boundaries for their businesses andstrengthening prudential supervision so that development finance and policy financecan fully play their role in supporting economic structural transformation andhigh-quality economic development. Focusing on strengthening the mechanisms ofcorporate governance, reforms of commercial banks and other financial enterpriseswill go deeper continuously so as to regulate the relationship between the generalmeeting of shareholders, the board of directors, the board of supervisors, andmanagement, and to improve authorized management, thereby giving rise to effectivedecision-making, implementation as well as checks and balances, and enhancing theirbusiness management and risk control capabilities. Seventh, the PBC will make continued efforts to fight the tough battle offorestalling and defusing major financial risks so as to ensure that risks aregenerally controllable and steadily subsiding, and to firmly defend the bottomline that no systemic risk should occur. While consolidating the success alreadyachieved, the PBC will adhere to the fundamental principles of maintaining overallstability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision. It will consider new developments in themacroeconomic situation from a holistic perspective and properly handle therelationship between fighting the pandemic, reviving the economy, and preventingand controlling risks, while acting prudently to defuse risks and firmly defending thebottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Moreover, the PBC will support banks, particularly small and medium-sized banks, to replenish capital through multiplechannels and to improve their governance, and will resolve non-performing loans withmore efforts so as to enhance the soundness of financial institutions.
Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2020, the People's Bank of China (PBC) has resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. With the sound monetary policy more flexible, appropriate, and targeted, money and credit and aggregate financing witnessed a reasonable growth in scale, the credit structure was further improved, and the quality and efficiency of financial services for the real economy were increasingly higher, thus driving the steady recovery of the macro-economy and yielding positive results for stabilizing businesses and securing employment. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level From the third quarter of 2020, amid the changes in economic and financial conditions, the PBC had a rational grasp of the intensity and pace of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) and open market operations (OMOs) to promptly satisfy reasonable demands for liquidity in financial institutions. Liquidity in the banking system was constantly kept adequate at a reasonable level, and an equilibrium was maintained between liquidity supply and demand in the short, medium, and long terms. Capacity to adjust liquidity has been further improved. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened expectation management by announcing monetary policy arrangements in advance and it ironed out short-term fluctuations in the market in a timely manner. With the system of policy interest rates further refined, money market interest rates were guided to move smoothly around the OMO rates, and the volatility of interest rates was further reduced. Stable market expectations enabled financial institutions to trim down their preventive demands for liquidity. At the end of September, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.6 percent, down 0.2 percentage points from the previous year. II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the credit structure optimized and the lending rates moving downwards Loans grew at a reasonable rate and the financial sector continued to support the recovery of the real economy. Pursuing a sound monetary policy, the PBC properly managed the intensity, pace, and focus of adjustments in line with the requirement of being flexible, appropriate, and targeted, and it constantly released the potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform to lower financing costs. The role of a targeted structural monetary policy was brought into play to promote lending in favor of micro and small businesses (MSBs) and private enterprises. Outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 12.8 percent year on year to RMB175.5 trillion at end-September, increasing RMB16.9 trillion from the beginning of the year and RMB3.1 trillion more than the increase in the corresponding period of 2019. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 13.0 percent year on year to RMB169.4 trillion, up RMB16.3 trillion from the beginning of the year and a larger increase of RMB2.6 trillion compared with the corresponding period of the previous year. The credit structure was remarkably optimized. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector and loans to MSBs recorded a rapid growth. At end-September, loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB10.6 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB2.3 trillion. Medium and long-termloans to the manufacturing sector gained 30.5 percent, an acceleration for eleven consecutive months. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 29.6 percent year on year to RMB14.6 trillion at end-September and their growth rates hit new records from March to September. These loans supported 31.28 million MSBs, increasing 21.8 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, inclusive loans to MSBs increased by RMB3 trillion, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.2 trillion.The weighted average interest rates on loans stood at a relatively low level and corporate lending rates continued to move downwards. In September, the one-year LPR fell by 0.3 percentage points from December 2019 to 3.85 percent, and the overfive-year LPR fell by 0.15 percentage points to 4.65 percent. In September, the weighted average lending rate recorded 5.12 percent, down 0.32 percentage points from December 2019 and 0.5 percentage points year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 5.31 percent, down 0.43 percentage points from December 2019 and 0.65 percentage points year on year; the weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.49 percentage points from December 2019 to 4.63 percent, a drop clearly exceeding that of the LPR, which is conducive to lowering the financing costs of enterprises.The sustained easy monetary policies of the developed economies prompted a decrease in the interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans. In September, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominateddeposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.21 percent and 0.72 percent, respectively, up 0.01 percentage points and down 0.03 percentage points, respectively, from June. The weighted average interest rates of USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.37 percent and 1.24 percent, respectively, down 0.20 percentage points and 0.23 percentage points, respectively, from June.Growth of deposits picked up. At end-September, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB216.9 trillion, up 10.7 percent year on year, 2.1 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB211.1 trillion, up 10.7 percent year on year, 2 percentage points higher than those at the end of the previous year.Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD848.7 billion, an increase of USD90.9 billion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of USD86.2 billion year on year. Fiscal revenues declined, expenditures for pandemic containment increased, and the distribution of funds for special bonds accelerated. Fiscal deposits decreased by 2.9 percent year on year.III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at a reasonable rate At end-September, outstanding M2 recorded RMB216.4 trillion, up 10.9 percent year on year, an acceleration of 2.2 percentage points from the end of 2019. Outstanding M1 registered RMB60.2 trillion, a year-on-year growth of 8.1 percent and 3.7 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding M0 reached RMB8.2 trillion, up 11.1 percent year on year and an increase of 5.7 percentage points from the end of 2019. The first three quarters of 2020 witnessed a net cash injection into the economy of RMB518.1 billion, a rise of RMB426.0 billionAccording to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) reached RMB280.07 trillion at end-September, up 13.5 percent year on year and an acceleration of 2.8 percentage points over the end of the previous year. In the first three quarters of 2020, the incremental AFRE reached RMB29.62 trillion on a cumulative basis, an increase of RMB9.01 trillion year on year. Growth of the AFRE was characterized by the following features. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-year increase. Second, the drop in entrusted loans narrowed and the year-on-year growth in undiscounted bankers’ acceptances expanded. Third, both corporate bonds and equity financing increased considerably compared with the previous year. Fourth, government bonds saw a significantly larger year-on-year increase. Fifth, the decline in asset-backed securities of depository financial institutions accelerated from the previous year, while the growth in written- off loans accelerated.Box 1 The Correct Approach to Understanding the Relationship Between the Central Bank Balance Sheet and Money Supply In the traditional view, a change in broad money (M2) results from a change in base money, which is amplified by the money multiplier. As base money mainly consists of currency in circulation, required reserves, and excess reserves, it constitutes the major liabilities of the central bank, reflects implementation of the monetary policy, and is close to the size of the central bank’s balance sheet numerically. Therefore, a changein the size of the central bank’s balance sheet is easily regarded as a change in the monetary policy stance. As a matter of fact, there is no constant correlation between the growth of M2 and the change in the size of the central bank’s balance sheet and base money. Commercial banks, rather than the central bank, are the direct broad money creators. In reality, M2 is created by banks through credit expansion, such as bank lending, which is an independent behavior by banks and has nothing to do with base money. The central bank both provides support for and puts constraints on bank money creation by adjusting base money. When creating money through bank lending, the banks transfer the excess reserves, which are equal to a certain proportion of the new deposits, into the required reserves according to the requirements of the central bank. The central bank itself is not the money creator. It should be noted that excess reserves are the liquidity in the banking system that can support money creation by banks, while the required reserves are the “frozen” liquidity in the banking system that cannot support money creation. As the central bank’s balance sheet and base money include the sum of the above two items, it is of little significance to simply use them to analyze the monetary policy stance. For example, prior to the global financial crisis in 2008, the size of the US Fed’s balance sheet remained basically unchanged, and its monetary policy stance was tightened or loosened mainly through adjustments of the policy rate. Another example is that the size of the balance sheet of China’s central bank expanded cumulatively eight times from early 2000 to end-2013, along with which there were also changes in China’s monetary policy stance.Over a broader time span, the balance sheet expansion of China’s central bank has been roughly the same as that of the central banks of the major developed economies. From the beginning of 2000 to end-September 2020, the balance sheet of China’s central bank expanded 9.6 times, which was roughly the same as that of the US Fed (9.5 times), the European Central Bank (7.1 times), and the Bank of Japan (5.2 times) over the same period (see Figure 2). The balance sheet expansion of China’s central bank, starting from the beginning of this century, is a passive scale-up resulting from the growth of funds outstanding for foreign exchange, while the corresponding growth of base money mainly comes from the “frozen” required reserves, some of which will be “unfrozen” and become excess reserves when the central bank cuts the required reserve ratio (RRR). A RRR cut can also increase the liquidity in the banking system and support money creation, but the size of the central bank’s balance sheet and base money will remain unchanged, or may even decrease in the short term, as the banks repay their loans to the central bank with the funds unleashed from the RRR cut. In contrast, the central banks in the major developed economies started their large-scale balance sheet expansion in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008, which was aimed at further injecting liquidity through quantitative easing to stimulate the economy when the normal monetary policy space was depleted. The balance sheet expansion of the central banks in the developed economies basically corresponds to an increase in excess reserves, which is essentially different from that of China. In recent years, breaking away from the passive balance sheet expansion caused by the growth of funds outstanding for foreign exchange, China’s central bank has significantly enhanced its independence in monetary policy implementation, and the role of banks as the center of money creation has been brought into full play. Since the beginning of 2020, the PBC has mainly employed the two monetary policy instruments of RRR cuts and central bank lending to cushion the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, both of which have had an effect on the central bank’s balance sheet. As the balance sheet scale-down resulting from the RRR cuts counteracts the scale-up brought about by central bank lending, the size of the central bank’s balance sheet remains basically stable while the growth rates of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are significantly higher than those in 2019. Compared with the ballooning size of the central bank balance sheets in the major developed economies, China’s central bank has maintained a normal monetary policy with a smooth transmission.One point that needs to be emphasized is that the money multiplier is the identity ratio between M2 and base money. The creation of M2 is the behavior of banks. Banks’ demand for required reserve payments after creating deposits through bank lending can be offset by the central bank’s RRR cuts, which shrink the central bank’s balance sheet, or be met by central bank lending, which expands the balance sheet. This means the money multiplier is actually an ex-post identity result and there is no direct logical relationship between the numerator and the denominator. The traditional view on the money multiplier is a mechanical observation of money creation, without a full awareness that it is commercial banks that create the money. Hence, it cannot be used to realistically analyze the money. In general, there is no intrinsic logic underlying the relationship among the size of the central bank’s balance sheet, the money multiplier, and the growth of M2. Moreover, as one of the few large economies that stick to a normal monetary policy, China does not need to inject liquidity through a large-scale expansion of its central bank’s balance sheet. Therefore, it is inappropriate to measure the effects of monetary policy simply by gauging the expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet or by the money multiplier. The key to observing the looseness or tightness of the monetary policy is to observe the money supply or the AFRE, both of which are the intermediate targets of the monetary policy. A reasonable growth of money and credit indicates that the banks’ market-based role in money creation functions well and the central bank provides a moderate amount of base money. Going forward, in line with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC will continue to adopt a sound monetary policy in a more flexible, more appropriate, and better targeted manner, do a good job in designing cross-cyclical policies, improve the mechanism of money supply management, and bring into full play the positive role of the supply of base money in promoting high-quality development of the economy. IV. The RMB exchange rate appreciated slightly, and cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow Since the beginning of 2020, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In thefirst three quarters, the RMB exchange rate appreciated slightly against a basket of currencies. At end-September, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 94.40 and 92.45, respectively, up 3.29 percent and 0.70 percent from end-2019, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), at end-September, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 2.67 percent and 2.19 percent from end-2019, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism commenced to end-September 2020, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated by 35.85 percent and 49.66 percent, respectively. In the first three quarters of 2020, the RMB exchange rate against the USD became more flexible and appreciated slightly. At end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the USD was 6.8101, up 2.44 percent from end-2019, and it appreciated by 21.53 percent on a cumulative basis from the launch of the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism in 2005. In the first three quarters of 2020, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rate against the USD was 4.25 percent. On October 27, 2020, the Secretariat of the China Foreign Exchange Market Self-Regulatory Framework announced that some quoting banks of the RMB’s central parity against the USD took the initiative to phase out in succession the use of a “counter-cyclical factor” in the quotation model of the RMB’s central parity against the USD based on their judgment of the economic fundamentals and market situations. The adjusted model was conducive to enhancing the transparency, benchmark role, and effectiveness of the central parity quotations made by the quoting banks, and it demonstrated the role of market entities in the Foreign Exchange Market Self- Regulatory Framework. Cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow with roughly balanced receipts and payments. In the first three quarters of 2020, cross-border RMB settlements totaled RMB20.8 trillion, up 44 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB10.3 trillion and RMB10.5 trillion, respectively. Cross- border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 11 percent year on year to RMB4.9 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB3.4 trillion whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and other items registered RMB1.5 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account posted RMB15.9 trillion, up 58 percent year on year.Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations Since the beginning of 2020, amid the daunting challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the PBC has adhered to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, made prompt and effective responses, and adopted a sound monetary policy in a more flexible, more appropriate, and better targeted manner. The PBC flexibly managed the intensity, pace, and focus of adjustments, remained committed to the already set combined goals of maintaining an appropriate aggregate policy, substantially lowering financing costs, and supporting the real economy in response to the great uncertainties in the environment, and went all out to ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’ s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning ofprimary-level governments, so as to create a favorable monetary and financial environment for stabilizing businesses and securing employment and to provide strong support for pandemic containment and economic recovery. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Maintaining adequate liquidity at a reasonable level in the banking system. Since the beginning of Q3 2020, in light of the current liquidity level in the banking system, financial institutions’ demand for liquidity, intensive government bond issuances, and other factors, the PBC conducted open market operations (OMOs) in a flexible manner, strengthened coordination of OMOs with mid and long-term monetary policy instruments, and maintained adequate liquidity at a reasonable level in the banking system as always, which was neither loosened nor tightened, with liquidity supply in the short, medium and long terms maintaining an equilibrium level that matched market demand. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened market communications, improved the transparency of monetary policy, and effectively stabilized market expectations by disclosing the plan of the month for Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) operations in advance in the Announcement of Open Market Operations. Guiding money market rates to move smoothly around the OMO rates. Since the beginning of Q3，the 7-day repo rate has remained unchanged at 2.20 percent on the open market, unaffected by the continuously easing monetary policies adopted by the developed economies, which steadily sends policy rate signals and demonstrates a sound monetary policy stance. In the meanwhile, the 7-day and 14-day open market operations were reasonably matched so as to iron out the short-term liquidity fluctuations caused by tax peaks, intensive government bond issuances, seasonal factors, etc., and to guide money market rates to move smoothly within a reasonable range around the OMO rates, hence reducing interest rate volatility and bringing into play the increasingly important role of OMO rates as pivotal short-term market rates. In Q3, the 7-day rate (DR007), which is the weighted average funding rate between depository institutions on the interbank market, averaged 2.15 percent, 44 basis points lower than that in Q3 2019. At end-September, the DR007 stood at 2.45 percent, 40 basis points lower than that at the same time of the previous year. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q3, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with a total amount registering RMB15billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent. Since the beginning of 2020, the PBC has conducted CBS operations once in each month, totaling RMB46 billion. The CBS operations played a positive role in improving liquidity on the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially small and medium-sized banks.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q3, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB40 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB20 billion, RMB10 billion, and RMB10 billion, respectively. In Q1–Q3 2020, the PBC issued in Hong Kong nine batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in a total amount of RMB120 billion. The regular issuance of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong not only enriched RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools on the Hong Kong market but also fostered the offshore issues of RMB-denominated bonds by both domestic and overseas financial institutions and enterprises, thus promoting the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market. According to statistics, from January to September 2020, various bond issuers other than the PBC issued over RMB99 billion of offshore RMB-denominated bonds, a year-on-year growth of 25 percent. The market would have been more willing to issue bonds without the disruption of the COVID-19 pandemic. With sustained growth in issuances, the how and where to issue RMB-denominated bondsoffshore have become increasingly diversified and market vitality has improved substantially. II. Conducting Medium-term Lending Facility and Standing Lending Facility operations Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. The reasonable supply of medium- and long-term liquidity was ensured, giving full play to the signaling and guiding functions of the mid-term policy rate. From January to September, the PBC conducted a total of RMB2.7 trillion of MLF operations, all with a maturity of one year. Specifically, the amount of MLF operations posted RMB1.7 trillion in Q3, with a net injection of medium- and long-term liquidity of RMB550 billion. At end-September, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.1 trillion, RMB410 billion more than that at the beginning of the year. The rate of the latest one-year MLF operation posted 2.95 percent, the same as that at end-June. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner. The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was met in the full amount, with the SLF playing the role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, thus promoting the smooth operation of the money market. From January to September, the PBC conducted a total of RMB157.4 billion SLF operations, of which RMB6 billion of the operations were conducted in Q3. At end-September, the balance of SLF operations registered RMB2.5 billion, and the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates were 3.05 percent, 3.2 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively, leveling off as compared with those at end-June. III. Enhancing monetary and credit support to offset the impact of the COVID- 19 pandemic To coordinate on-going pandemic containment and economic and social development, the intensity, pace, and focus of monetary policy adjustments were properly managed based on the different features of each stage. Policy measures were implemented in a more direct manner with enhanced financial support for stabilizing businesses and securing employment, with the aim of ensuring stability on six fronts and maintainingFirst, liquidity remained adequate at a reasonable level. By means of required reserve ratio (RRR) cuts, MLF operations, and open market operations, liquidity was kept adequate at a reasonable level, thereby safeguarding the stable movement of market rates and creating a favorable liquidity environment for the issue of special central government bonds and local government special bonds. RMB1.7 trillion of short-term liquidity was provided to the financial market when it reopened after the Spring Festival vacation, which effectively stabilized market expectations. The three rounds of RRR cuts in the first nine months of the year released RMB1.75 trillion of long-term funds. Second, the policies of RMB1.8 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts were rolled out and put into place, with a multi-level and multi-tier approach. At the early stage of the pandemic outbreak, on January 31, the PBC arranged a first round of special central bank lending in the amount of RMB300 billion so as to facilitate the issuance of loans for key medical and daily-necessity enterprises at preferential interest rates. The actual financing costs for enterprises dropped to below 1.6 percent after a 50-percent fiscal subsidy on the loan interest, which vigorously supported the provision of medical supplies and daily necessities. When China entered the stage of work and production resumption with preliminary containment of the pandemic, as a second step the PBC rolled out RMB500 billion of central bank lending and central bank discounts on February 26. Commercial banks issued loans at rates no higher than the one-year LPR plus 50 basis points, which forcefully supported the resumption of work and production. With remarkable achievements in pandemic control during the previous stage and at the stage of accelerated resumption of production and order, the PBC rolled out a third round of RMB1 trillion of inclusive central bank lending and central bank discounts on April 20, in an attempt to facilitate bank issuances of more loans to rural-development businesses, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and private enterprises. By keeping the average financing costs below 5.5 percent, the PBC expended all-out efforts to secure market entities. The policies of RMB300 billion of special central bank lending and RMB500 billion of central bank lending and central bank discounts were fully implemented by end-June. Over 80 percent of the RMB1 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts had been put into place by end-September, which played a vital role in supporting pandemic containment as well as supporting the resumption of work and production. Third, with highlighted characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy were proactively promoted, with the aim of stabilizing businesses, securing employment, and bolstering the development of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). On June 1, 2020, the PBC created two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy. The instrument in support of deferred repayments of inclusive MSB loans was operated on a monthly basis, providing a cumulative RMB4.7 billion of incentive funds to locally incorporated banks, and supporting a total of RMB469.5 billion of deferred principal of inclusive MSB loans from June to September. The weighted average time extension registered 12.6 months, easing the MSBs’ temporary pressures to repay the loan principal and interest. The support scheme for inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs was operated on a quarterly basis, providing a cumulative RMB93.2 billion of preferential funding to locally incorporated banks and supporting a total of RMB264.6 billion of unsecured loans for MSBs from March to September, effectively alleviating the financing strains on the MSBs. Fourth, the roles of financial institutions were brought into full play. Measures were taken to strengthen financial support for regions that were hard hit by the pandemic. Major state-owned banks were urged to ramp up support for inclusive MSBs, special credit support from policy banks was put into place, and locally incorporated banks were guided to effectively serve local communities. The financial regulatory authorities guided the financial sector to waive a part of its profits to the real economy by reducing loan interest rates through a deepened LPR reform, by implementing two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy, and by cutting charges and fees, etc. According to an estimation, a total of RMB1.25 trillion of benefits had been waived by the financial sector in favor of the real economy by end-October. With the policy effects further unfolding, the RMB1.5 trillion goal for the whole year is expected to be achieved. IV.Further improving the macroprudential policy framework The role of the macroprudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In Q3 2020, the PBC further improved the assessmentrequirements for the financing for MSBs, private firms, and the manufacturing sector in the MPA in an attempt to secure incremental financing flows to the manufacturing sector and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). The PBC improved the assessment for the use of the LPR, promoted banks to accelerate the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans, and pushed ahead with a further decline in the overall financing costs for the real sector. The foreign exchange risk reserve ratio was adjusted when appropriate. Since the beginning of 2020, the RMB exchange rate witnessed two-direction floating based on market supply and demand amid strengthened flexibility, stable market expectations, orderly cross-border capital flows, stable performance of the foreign exchange market, and balanced market demand and supply. As a result, the PBC decided to reduce the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from 20 percent to zero, effective from October 12, 2020, in a bid to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The mechanism of countercyclical capital buffer was established. In September 2020, the PBC and CBIRC jointly issued the Notice of the PBC and CBIRC on Establishing Mechanism of Countercyclical Capital Buffer (Yinfa No. 233 [2020]), stipulating the establishment of the mechanism of countercyclical capital buffer and setting the initial countercyclical capital buffer ratio at zero. Looking forward, the PBC and CBIRC will assess and adjust the countercyclical capital buffer ratio as needed, taking into account in a comprehensive manner the macroeconomic and financial conditions, the macro leverage level, the soundness of the banking system, exposure to systemic financial risks, and other factors. The development of financial holding companies was promoted with strengthened regulation. In September 2020, the State Council issued the Decisions on Implementing the Access Management of Financial Holding Companies (Guofa No. 12 [2020], hereinafter referred to as the Decisions), and the PBC promulgated the Trial Measures on Regulation of Financial Holding Companies (Order No. 4 [2020] of the People’s Bank of China, hereinafter referred to as the Measures). In line with the idea of macroprudential management and the principle of all-round, continuous, and look-through regulation, law-based market access and regulation is carried out on the basis of consolidated management of financial holding companies (FHCs), which are formed via investments by non-financial enterprises as controlling shareholders, so as to strengthen regulationof the business activities of the financial holding companies (FHC). Adhering to the principle that separate operation is the mainstream of the financial sector, the Decisions and the Measures institutionally isolated the real sector from the financial sector, which contributed to the sustainable and healthy development of the FHCs, to the prevention of risk contagion, and to a virtuous circle between the economy and finance. V.Giving full play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments The PBC actively used credit policies to support central bank lending, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policy tools to guide financial institutions to step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural people, as well as poverty alleviation. Good use was made of central bank lending to support special poverty alleviation projects to increase credit supply to areas of extreme poverty, including the “three autonomous regions,” i.e., Tibet, four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, the areas in four provinces with large Tibetan populations, and the “three autonomous prefectures,” i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, to lower the financing costs in these areas as well as to achieve targeted poverty alleviation. In Q3, RMB7.2 billion of central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects was provided, with the nationwide balance recording RMB29.1 billion at end-September. At end-September, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development registered RMB378.4 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB800.8 billion and RMB172.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB482.2 billion. In the first nine months of 2020, the PBC made a net withdrawal of PSLs in the amount of RMB103.1 billion from policy and development banks, with the net withdrawal in Q3 totaling RMB74.7 billion and the outstanding PSL registering RMB3.4343 trillion at end-September. Targeted Medium-term Lending Facilities (TMLFs) maturing in Q3 were rolled over in the form of MLF. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions to expand credit supply to MSBs and private firms at low costs. On July 15, 2020, the PBC conducted one-year MLF operations totaling RMB400 billion with a rate of 2.95 percent, which included the rollover of the TMLFs maturing in July. The instrument can roll over up to 3 years. At the end of September, the outstanding TMLFs totaled RMB296.6 billion. Box 2 Fully Implementing Monetary Policy Instruments to Enable Direct Support to the Real Economy To implement the policy arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on ensuring stability on six fronts and maintaining security in six areas, the PBC, in line with the requirements of the Report on the Work of the Government (2020), unveiled on June 1, 2020 two instruments that can directly support the real economy, namely a support instrument to defer the repayment of inclusive loans for micro and small businesses (MSBs), and a support scheme for inclusive unsecured loans to MSBs. The instruments are aimed at further improving the system of structural monetary policy instruments and beefing up financial support to keep businesses and employment stable. I. A support instrument allowing MSBs to defer repayments of inclusive loans has been introduced to effectively ease repayment pressures Amid the COVID-19 fallout, most MSMEs faced cash flow problems. To ease their pressure to repay the loan principal and interest, the PBC and the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) promptly introduced policies to defer principal and interest repayments of the loans for MSMEs, with the repayment deadline extended until March 31, 2021. Specifically, repayments of inclusive loans for MSBs eligible for this policy should all be deferred, and other businesses facing financial difficulties can negotiate with their creditors about deferred repayments. According to this policy, all inclusive loans for MSBs that are due to mature before end-2020 are eligible to apply to defer the principal and interest repayments. Banks shall approve of the MSBs’ deferred repayments as long as that in their applications they promise to keep their employment basically stable. As of end-September, 2020, principal repayments of 1.89 million market entities and interest repayments of 910 thousand market entities have been deferred by banking institutions across the country, involving RMB4.7 trillion of principal and interest of matured loans. To encourage locally incorporated banks to ensure maximum coverage of the deferred repayments policy on inclusive loans of MSBs, the PBC has launched a support instrument with the provision of funds totaling RMB40 billion. The PBC, through interest rate swap agreements signed between special purpose vehicles (SPVs) and locally incorporated banks, provides the banks with incentive funds equal to 1 percent of the total principal of inclusive MSB loans under deferred repayment. Thisinstrument is conducted on a monthly basis, and incentives totaling RMB4.7 billion have been channeled to locally incorporated banks, with inclusive MSB loan principal worth RMB469.5 billion having been deferred in repayments from June to September, covering 500 thousand MSBs. II. A support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans has been launched to effectively enhance their share In light of the MSBs’ high operational risks, banks normally require them to provide collateral guarantees before issuing them loans. Currently, unsecured loans issued by locally incorporated banks to MSBs account for only around 8 percent of their total loans. To alleviate the pains and difficulties arising from the MSBs’ lack of such guarantees and to raise the share of the unsecured MSB loans, the PBC has launched a support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans, with the provision of funds totaling RMB400 billion. The PBC provides favorable funding support for locally incorporated banks through support scheme agreements for unsecured loans signed between the SPVs and the banks. This support scheme is mainly targeted at locally incorporated banks with sound performance, and only those rated between level 1 and 5 in the PBC’s rating of financial institutions in the previous quarter can qualify as applicants. For unsecured inclusive MSB loans with a maturity of no less than 6 months that are newly issued by eligible locally incorporated banks from March 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020, the PBC provides the banks with favorable funding through the support scheme. The funding equals 40 percent of the principal of the actually issued loans, with a maturity of one year. The MSBs covered by the plan must promise to keep employment basically stable. From March to September 2020, banking institutions across the country cumulatively issued RMB2.3 trillion of inclusive unsecured loans to MSBs, a year-on-year increase of RMB796.1 billion. Specifically, loans issued by locally incorporated banks with a rate between level 1 and 5 registered RMB973.3 billion, a year-on-year increase of RMB349.9 billion. This instrument is conducted on a quarterly basis, and RMB93.2 billion of favorable funding has been provided to locally incorporated banks rated between level 1 and 5. They were supported to issue RMB264.6 billion of unsecured loans to MSBs from March to September, covering 2.33 million MSBs.III. Following market-based principles to enable targeted and direct financial support to the real economy First, they are market-based. The PBC followed the commercial principle that commercial banks are provided with autonomy in their business operations and they can undertake credit risks by themselves. Through innovations in the operational arrangements of monetary policy instruments and the design of an incentive compatibility mechanism, financial institutions are fully motivated to take the initiative to enhance financial services to MSBs. Second, they provide direct support to the real economy. Direct support does not mean the PBC directly provides funds to businesses. Instead, funding support provided by these two instruments is channeled to the real economy through financial institutions. These two instruments directly link monetary policy operations with financial support to financial institutions for MSBs. As long as MSBs commit themselves to keeping employment basically stable, and locally incorporated banks follow the rules in arranging loan deferments or in issuing unsecured loans to MSBs, these banks are eligible for PBC support, thus ensuring efficient and direct flows of funds to the real economy. Third, they are targeted. These two instruments specify the eligible targets and scope of policy support. Locally incorporated banks with MSBs as their major clients are eligible for policy support, and the scope includes deferred principal and interest repayments of the inclusive loans of MSBs and newly-issued inclusive unsecured loans to MSBs, thus ensuring precise and targeted funding support to MSBs through locally incorporated banks. Going forward, the PBC will continue to put in place these two monetary policy instruments step by step, effectively ease the MSBs’ pressures to repay loan principal and interest, increase the share of unsecured loans, and bolster financial support to keep businesses and employment stable.VI. Bringing into full play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reform By focusing its efforts on promoting high-quality development, the PBC guided financial institutions to continue to step up support to key areas and weak links in the national economy,and kept businesses and employment stable, thus ensuring that the targets and tasks for winning the battle against poverty can be met, and bringing to completion the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. First, the PBC accelerated financial support to keep businesses and employment stable. A series of meetings was held to promote financial support to keep businesses and employment stable, sustained efforts were made to strengthen credit support to MSMEs, and funding for MSMEs was promoted to achieve “an increase in quantity, a decrease in price, an improvement in quality, and an expansion in coverage.” The PBC made innovations in monetary policy instruments that can directly support the real economy, issued the Notice on Extending the Policy of Provisional Deferred Repayments of Loan Principal and Interest for Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises and Stepping up Support for Unsecured Loans of Micro and Small Businesses , clarified and improved policies, regularly monitored and issued reports, boosted media coverage and communications, and ensured policy implementation and transmission. By focusing on key support groups and key businesses, the PBC made innovations in many types of activities connecting government agencies, banks, and businesses to enable more effective and better-targeted connections. Second, the PBC made solid progress in targeted financial poverty alleviation. Areas in extreme poverty and counties that have not been lifted out of poverty were provided with stronger financial support, more financial support was channeled to industries for poverty alleviation, basic financial services in poverty-stricken areas were consolidated and enhanced, the establishment of supporting mechanisms for financial poverty alleviation was advanced, risks in financial poverty alleviation were well prevented, and the establishment of a longterm mechanism to reduce poverty by financial support was promoted. Third, the PBC continued to increase financial inputs to boost rural revitalization. Sustained financial guarantees were provided for the production of hogs and other areas, credit support to increase the area of high-standard cropland and to consolidate rural lands was promoted, the Opinions on Expanding Effective Investments in Agriculture and Rural Areas and on Accelerating the Strengthening of Prominent Weaknesses in Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Farmers were launched by the Office of the Central Leading Group for Rural Affairs with the cooperation of the PBC, financial support for effective investment in agriculture and rural areas was boosted, and financial services for new-type rural business entities and small rural households were enhanced to effectively meet their financing needs for business development.VII. Deepening the market-based interest rate reform The PBC advanced completion of the LPR reform and promoted the reduction of loan rates. First, the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans was successfully achieved. As of end-August, 92.4 percent of outstanding loans had completed the shift in the pricing benchmark. Specifically, 90 percent of the outstanding corporate loans and 99 percent of individual housing mortgage loans had completed the shift; 91 percent of the aforementioned outstanding loans were shifted to be priced with the LPR for reference. With the completion of the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans, the movements of the LPR can have an impact on most of the loans. Accordingly, the implicit floor of the loan rates was completely removed and the efficiency of the transmission of monetary policy was further enhanced, with the financing costs lowered more notably. Second, the pricing of internal funds of financial institutions became notably more market-based. With the deepening of the LPR reform, the market-based LPR has gradually replaced the benchmark loan rates as a key reference for the internal funds transfer pricing (FTP) of the commercial banks. Up to now, all the national banks have established the FTP system and have realized the linkage between the FTP and the LPR. Most of the locally incorporated financial institutions have also set up the FTP mechanism and have included the LPR in the FTP. Third, derivatives of the LPR witnessed fairly rapid development. As the pricing benchmark for outstanding loans was shifted to the LPR, basic assets pegged to the LPR will increase. There will be a rise in demand of financial institutions and enterprises for hedging against the risks brought about by LPR assets or the negative debt interest rate, with the LPR derivative transactions growing rapidly. Fourth, the LPR reform also played an important role in promoting the market-based reform of deposit rates. In September 2019, the weighted average interest rates of three-year and five-year deposits stood at 3.67 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively, down by 5 basis points and 26 basis points from last December.VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate regime The PBC continued to advance the market-based exchange rate regime reform and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of the exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. Meanwhile, the PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q3, the highest and lowest CNY central parities were 6.7591 and 7.0710, respectively against the USD. During the 66 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 42 days and depreciated on 24 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 0.59 percent (397 bps) and 0.41 percent (277 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate against other major international currencies floated in two ways. At end-September, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar and the pound had appreciated 2.44 percent and 4.48 percent, respectively, from end-2019, while the RMB had depreciated 2.23 percent and 0.53 percent against the euro and the Japanese yen. From the RMB exchange rate regime reform in 2005 to end-September 2020, the RMB against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen appreciated by a cumulative total of 21.53 percent, 25.27 percent, and 13.39 percent, respectively. Direct RMB trading was buoyant on the interbank foreign exchange market with steady liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and facilitate bilateral trade and investment.As of end-September, under the bilateral currency-swap agreements between the PBC and foreign monetary authorities, the latter utilized a total of RMB32.826 billion, and the former utilized an equivalent of USD447 million denominated in foreign currencies. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.Box 3 Advancing Toward a More Market-Based RMB Exchange RateFormation Mechanism Since 1994, the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has undergone continuous reforms so as to be more market-based. It has gradually evolved into a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. The extent to which the exchange rate is market-based has been continuously enhanced, with the market playing a decisive role in its formation. In recent years, this type of exchange rate regime has managed to withstand the test of several rounds of shocks. Efforts will be made to stick to the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism, to optimize allocation of financial resources, to enhance the flexibility of the exchange rate, and to place an emphasis on guiding expectations, in a bid to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at anadaptive and equilibrium level under the framework of a general equilibrium. 1. Current features of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism First, the PBC has exited from regular intervention, with the RMB exchange rate mainly determined by the market. During the recent two years, the PBC has greatly reduced foreign exchange interventions by enhancing the role of market forces. While giving full play to the exchange rate as a price signal, the PBC has improved the efficiency of resource allocations. Second, the RMB exchange rate has floated in two ways. From 2019 to Q3 of 2020, the RMB appreciated on 216 days and depreciated on 211 days during the 427 trading days. Recently, the RMB has appreciated, which largely reflects China’s sound economic fundamentals. As China took the lead in containing the pandemic, it became the first country to resume work and production and to return to positive economic growth. With rapid growth of exports, overseas entities have continuously increased their RMB asset holdings. Overall, the RMB exchange rate continues to move in both directions. Third, the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has managed to withstand the test of several rounds of shocks. It has maintained flexibility in the exchange rate and has given full play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. During the first nine months of 2020, the annual volatility rate of the RMB against the USD posted 4.25 percent, virtually the same as those of the other major international currencies. As of end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the USD appreciated 2.4 percent from the beginning of 2020, and the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB Index against a basket of currencies appreciated 3.3 percent, registering a fairly moderate appreciation. Over the same period, the euro and Japanese yen appreciated against the USD by approximately 4.5 percent and 3 percent, respectively. Fourth, as social expectations are stable, the foreign exchange market operates in an orderly manner. In recent years, the external environment has been getting more and more complicated. However, with strengthened expectation guidance by the PBC,expectations about the foreign exchange market remain stable. The “convergence of three prices,” namely, the central parity, the onshore price, and the offshore price, has been achieved, avoiding the impact of the exchange rate overshooting on the macro economy. The depth of the foreign exchange market has gradually been improved, and its capacity to withstand shocks has been notably enhanced. The settlement and sale of foreign exchange by banks are basically balanced, and market supply and demand remain stable. Fifth, the market-based RMB exchange rate has promoted a balance between an internal and external equilibrium. As the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate increases, the autonomy of monetary policy is enhanced. The PBC has pursued a sound monetary policy based on the domestic economic situation, avoiding a conflict in goals between an internal and external equilibrium. In this context, the RMB exchange rate has undergone orderly adjustments, reasonably reflecting changes in the supply and demand of the foreign exchange market. An automatic equilibrium in the balance of payments has been achieved, helping to strike a balance between an internal and external equilibrium. During the first half of 2020, the current account ran a surplus, while the capital account saw a deficit, exhibiting a notable pattern of two-way capital flows. On the one hand, capital inflows have increased, improving the structure of domestic asset holders. On the other hand, spontaneous capital outflows have increased. The major reason is that domestic banks have voluntarily increased their holdings of overseas assets and domestic institutions have raised the proportion of their overseas assets. This is a healthy pattern. 2. Adhering to a more market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism In terms of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism reform, the market will continue to play a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, thereby optimizing the allocation of financial resources. First, the PBC will stick to the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, as this regime is currently the most appropriate institutional arrangement for an emerging economy like China. It will continue to let the market play a role in determining the exchange rate and will avoid regular intervention in the foreign exchange market. Meanwhile, China’s trade and investment structure is becoming more diversified. Changes in the exchange rates of its major trade and investment partners are all likely to have animpact on its balance of payments and its internal and external equilibrium. With continuous reference to a basket of currencies, the role of the exchange rate in adjusting the macro economy and serving as a signal can be effectively enhanced. Second, work will be done to continuously increase the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate so as to give full play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. At present, the international environment is becoming more complicated, with notable fluctuations in the international financial market. As investors are sensitive to any expectation changes, some news may trigger sharp market fluctuations. Only through enhancing flexibility of the RMB exchange rate can China withstand the impact of the external destabilizing factors and uncertainties, thereby maintaining the autonomy of its monetary policy. Meanwhile, importance must be attached to guiding expectations so as to create conditions for the orderly operation of the foreign exchange market and for the RMB exchange rate to be kept at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Third, efforts will be made to strengthen management of the foreign exchange market. As the foreign exchange market exhibits a notable feature of heterogeneous expectations, changes in the expectations are more likely to cause a herd effect and have a substantial impact on the movements of the exchange rate. The PBC will give full play to the self-discipline mechanism of the foreign exchange market. Financial institutions are required to remain “risk neutral” and to intensify the authenticity verification of enterprises’ foreign exchange derivative transactions so as to prevent the credit risks of financial institutions brought about by enterprises conducting transactions without a real need, leveraged illegal foreign exchange trading, and speculation and arbitrage. Fourth, work will be done to strike a balance between an internal and external equilibrium and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level under the framework of a general equilibrium. The RMB exchange rate is an important link connecting the real economy with the financial sector, the domestic economy with the overseas economy, and the domestic financial market with the international financial market. It is also a key pivot for coordinating RMB and foreign exchange policies and for handling an internal and external equilibrium. As China is a super-sized emerging economy, attention must be mainly focused on domestic conditions during the formulation and implementation of monetary policy. The market-based exchange rate is conducive to enhancing the autonomy of monetarypolicy and to striking a balance between an internal and external equilibrium so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level under the framework of a general equilibrium. IX. Promoting resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner and deepening the reform of financial institutions Disposal of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions was successfully implemented. The PBC worked closely with other relevant departments and regional governments to mitigate the impact of the pandemic and delivered crucial progress and important results in the disposal of high-risk small and medium- sized financial institutions. The reform and restructuring plans of key financial institutions, including Baoshang Bank (BSB) and Jinzhou Bank, were carried out smoothly so as to ensure the smooth operation of the financial system during the critical and sensitive period and to firmly defend the bottom line so that no systemic risks should occur. Risk resolution of BSB was promoted steadily and orderly. The takeover of BSB is a key campaign in the crucial battle of preventing and defusing financial risks. It is also the first case of disposal of a distressed bank through purchase and assumption (P&A) since the establishment of the deposit insurance system in 2015. At present, the relevant business, acquired by Mengshang Bank and Huishang Bank, is operating smoothly. According to the asset and capital verification results that BSB has become seriously insolvent, a bankruptcy petition will be filed for BSB, and liquidation of the equity of the former shareholders and unguaranteed claims will be conducted in a law- based manner. In addition, the relevant departments are in the process of holding the people concerned accountable based on laws and regulations. This shows that the takeover of BSB is a decisive action and it has produced notable results, orderly eliminated the risks of BSB, successfully achieved the dual policy goals of preventing systemic risks and safeguarding financial stability, as well as preventing moral hazards and strengthening market discipline. The reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC fully promoted implementation of the reform plans fordevelopment and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and the scope of their business, improving corporate governance and constraint and incentive mechanisms, and preventing financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and, with strengthened risk prevention and control, give full play to their role in supporting key areas and weak links in the national economy during the critical period so as to better serve national development strategies. X. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Foreign exchange arrangements for trade in goods were further improved. First, the pilot program for facilitating foreign exchange receipts and payments under trade in goods was expanded to more areas. By end-September 2020, the pilot program covered 56 banks and 374 enterprises in 19 places across China. Second, redundant regulations on the current account were sorted out and removed. In August 2020, with the release of the Circular of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on Issuing Guidance for Current Account Activities (2020 Edition) (Huifa No.11 [2020]), relevant rules and regulations were brought together in this all-in-one guidebook, while regulations and redundant provisions were significantly trimmed, including the rescinding of 29 regulations. Innovative development of new forms of trade was boosted. First, individuals are now able to make trade settlement through personal foreign exchange savings accounts. Second, six banks including China CITIC Bank have been approved to conduct cross-border foreign exchange activities based on electronic transaction information. Third, companies engaged in cross-border e-commerce are allowed to make net settlement payments according to the netting between expenses on overseas warehouses, logistics, and taxes and proceeds from export sales. Fourth, domestic companies engaged in international delivery services, logistics providers, and cross- border e-commerce platforms can pay the charges in advance for overseas warehousing and logistics for their customers. Fifth, the settlement of funds for market procurement trade in 31 pilot markets across China was facilitated. Sixth, comprehensive foreign trade service providers were encouraged to collect foreign exchange receipts on behalf of their clients, which benefited over 300 providers and nearly 100,000 foreign trade MSBs. Seventh, companies can submit summary declarations of small-value foreign-related receipts and payments in their own names so as to help MSBs accumulate good credit and lower trade costs.The promotion of personal foreign exchange business was more regulated and innovative. First, facilitation of foreign exchange sales of compensation was enhanced for overseas employees of Chinese companies. As of end-September 2020, there was a total of 12,000 simplified transactions, covering USD139 million. Second, off-counter processing of foreign exchange sales and purchases for overseas studies was introduced in some commercial banks, which are not part of the annual quota for foreign exchange purchases by individuals. As of end-September, there were 1,189 relevant transactions or the equivalent of USD26.12 million. Third, the pilot program for facilitating foreign exchange sales and purchases of the compensation for foreign professionals in China was approved in five places including Beijing and Chongqing. Fourth, the plan of some banks to facilitate small-value consumption under the current account by foreign individuals in China was approved. Order in the foreign exchange market was maintained. Monitoring and analysis of potential risks incurred by cross-border fund flows were strengthened. Emphasis was placed on cracking down on illegal financial activities, such as underground banks, cross-border gambling, and illegal online foreign exchange trading, so as to ensure stability on six fronts and maintain security in six areas. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In Q3 2020, the financial market operated generally smoothly. Money market transactions were active with stable interest rates. Amid the steady recovery of the economy, the coupon rates of all types of bonds rebounded and the volume of cash bond issuances and transactions expanded remarkably. The stock market continued to pick up and it witnessed year-on-year rises in both turnover and the size of funds raised. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market transactions were active, with stable interest rates Money market interest rates went up in July and August, followed by a fall in September. In September 2020, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending and pledged repos posted 1.8 percent and 1.93 percent, respectively,down 5 basis points and up 4 basis points, respectively, from June 2020. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond repos among depository institutions posted 1.73 percent, 20 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. At end-September, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.36 percent and 2.33 percent, respectively, up 58 and 10 basis points from end-June, respectively. The market saw active repo transactions and interbank lending. In the first three quarters of 2020, the volume of trading of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB733.3 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.9 trillion and a year-on-year increase of 19.4 percent. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB116.4 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB619.1 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 2.7 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos and overnight lending accounted for 84.8 percent and 90.5 percent, respectively, of the total turnover in bond repos and interbank lending, decreasing 0.4 percentage points and 1.2 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 15.1 percent year on year to RMB206.9 trillion. The interbank CD and negotiable CD businesses operated steadily. In Q3 2020, a total of 7,147 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB5.4 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB44.3 trillion. At end- September, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB11.2 trillion. In Q3 2020, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.61 percent, 8 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 10,407 negotiable CDs was issued by financial institutions in Q3 2020, raising RMB2.0 trillion, with a decrease of RMB625.3 billion year on year. The interest rate swap market witnessed orderly development. In Q3 2020, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 72,300 transactions, increasing 14.94 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB4.66 trillion, a decrease of 7.36 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB2.83 trillion, accounting for 60.8 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 83.09 percent and 14.29 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q3 2020, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 380 transactions, with RMB56.663 billion of the notional principal.The LPR interest rate option business developed steadily. Since the LPR interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market in March, it has attracted participation by a variety of market players, covering large commercial banks, joint- stock commercial banks, city commercial banks, rural commercial banks, foreignfunded banks, securities companies, and so forth. In Q3 2020, a total of 154 interest rate option transactions were concluded, totaling RMB36.65 billion. Specifically, 6 LPR interest rate swap transactions were concluded, amounting to RMB620 million of the notional principal, and 148 were LPR interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB36.03 billion of the notional principal. 2. The coupon rate of bonds rebounded, and transactions and issuances of cash bonds expanded Government bond yields generally experienced a choppy rise. In Q3, due to the continuous improvement of economic fundamentals, the easing of risk aversion on the market, and the impact of the stock-bond seesaw effect, at end-September the yields of 1-year and 10-year government bonds posted 2.65 percent and 3.15 percent, respectively, increasing by 47 basis points and 33 basis points, respectively, from end- June. The yield curve went upward in a flattening trend.The coupon rates of bonds rallied. The coupon rate of 10-year government bonds rolled over in September 2020 was 3.08 percent, 23 basis points higher than the rate in June 2020. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by China Development Bank was 3.64 percent, 56 basis points higher than the rate in June 2020. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated non-financial enterprises was 3.71 percent, 135 basis points higher than the rate in June 2020. The volume of cash bond transactions on the interbank market saw year-on-year growth and that on the stock exchanges witnessed a significant increase. In the first three quarters of 2020, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB205.66 trillion, registering an increase of 29.03 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bond trading on the interbank market was RMB192.07 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB1.02 trillion and an increase of 25.4 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB13.59 trillion, with an increase of 119.3 percent year on year. The value of bond lending transactions stood at RMB5.66 trillion, with an increase of 74.2 percent year on year. Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In the first three quarters of 2020, the cumulative value of bond issuances totaled RMB42.44 trillion, with an increase of 25.2 percent year on year. At end-September, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB113.76 trillion, with an increase of 18.6 percent year on year. In thefirst three quarters of 2020, the cumulative value of corporate debenture bonds registered RMB10.71 trillion, increasing 38.9 percent year on year.3. Bill financing edged up, and interest rates on the bill market remained relatively stableThe bill acceptance business developed steadily. From January to September 2020, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB16.5 trillion, rising 10.1 percent year on year. At end-September, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB13.9 trillion, increasing 11.9 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances dropped slightly, an increase by RMB1.2 trillion from the beginning of the year and a decrease by RMB278.5 billion from end-June; 70.3 percent of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances were issued by MSMEs. Bill financing continued to expand, with interest rates moving upward. From January to September 2020, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB30.6 trillion, growing 13.5 percent year on year. At end-September, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.1 trillion, up 7.3 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.8 percent of the total outstanding loans, 0.3 percentage points lower year on year. In Q3 2020, interest rates on the bill market moved upward. 4. The stock market continued to grow after a rebound, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year on year The stock indices continued to climb after a rebound. At end-September, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,218 points, increasing 7.8 percent from end-June. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 12,907 points, increasing 7.6 percent from end-June. Turnover on the stock markets expanded significantly. In the first three quarters of 2020, the combined turnover of the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB158.4 trillion and the average daily turnover was RMB865.8 billion, with an increase of 58.6 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets surged year on year. In the first three quarters of 2020, a cumulative RMB803.8 billion was raised, increasing 63.6 percent year on year. 5. Growth of premium income slowed down, while growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In the first three quarters of 2020, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB3.7 trillion, with a year-on-year increase of 7.2 percent, 5 percentage points lower than the annual growth rate in 2019. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB998.9 billion, with a year-on-year increase of 6.1 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claim and benefit payments increased 7.7 percent year on year, and total life insurance claim and benefit payments went up byThe growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-September, total assets in the insurance sector increased 12.4 percent year on year to RMB22.4 trillion, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage points from end-2019. Specifically, bank deposits increased 2.3 percent year on year and investment-linked assets expanded 18.8 percent year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions fell year on year In the first three quarters of 2020, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD5.7 trillion, a decrease of 5.3 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD12.1 trillion, a decrease of 6 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD6.9 trillion, accounting for 57.3 percent of the total swap turnover. Turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD75.4 billion, rising 26.6 percent year on year. Turnover in foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD514.9 billion, rising 51.2 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 61.2 percent of the total market share.Participants on the foreign exchange market expanded continuously. At end- September, there were 726 members on the foreign exchange spot market, 258 members on the foreign exchange forward market, 252 members on the foreign exchange swap market, 208 members on the currency swap market, and 159 members on the foreign exchange options market. There were 30 market makers on the spot market and 27 market makers on the forward and swap markets. 7. The gold market operated steadily, with an overall rise in prices Gold prices increased before declining. At end-September, international gold prices closed at USD1,886.90 per ounce, representing a gain of 6.72 percent from end-June. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB402.97 per gram, increasing 1.31 percent from end-June. In the first three quarters of 2020, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 49,500 tons, representing a decrease of 9.87 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB18.94 trillion, increasing 12 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market With the implementation of the Guiding Opinions of the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC, and SAFE on Regulating the Asset Management Business of Financial Institutions, the institutional arrangements in the bond market were constantly improved. In July 2020, the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC, and SAFE jointly released the Rules for Recognition of Standard Debt-Based Assets (Announcement No. 5 [2020] of the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC and SAFE), which specified the boundaries, identification criteria, and regulatory arrangements for standard debt-based assets and non-standard debt-based assets so as to guide well-regulated market development. 2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures industry The system for securities investor protection was further enhanced. In July 2020, the Supreme People’s Court released the Provisions on Several Issues Concerning Representative Actions Arising from Securities Disputes. The Provisions make detailed stipulations on the representative action rules in the Civil Procedure Law andthe Securities Law and clarify the standardized legal proceedings for both ordinary representative actions and special representative actions. Release of the said judicial interpretation marked the official introduction of the securities class action system. Risk disposal mechanisms of securities institutions were further improved. In July 2020, the CBIRC released the Guidelines for the Side Pocket Mechanism of Publicly Offered Securities Investment Funds (for Trial Implementation), which added a side pocket mechanism as a liquidity risk management tool for publicly-offered funds. Also stipulated in the Guidelines were the triggering conditions and the implementing procedures for the side pocket mechanism as well as the primary responsibilities of fund managers and the supervisory duties of custodians. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market Regulation of the allocation of equity assets of insurance companies was improved. In July 2020, the CSRC released the Notice on Matters Concerning Improving the Regulation of the Allocation of Equity Assets of Insurance Companies, which set differentiated regulatory proportions for equity asset investments, thus guiding insurance companies to conduct investments in a prudent and sound manner. The property insurance industry was propelled to shift toward high-quality development. In July 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Issuing the Three-Year Action Plan (2020–2022) of Promoting High-Quality Development of the Property Insurance Industry, which put forward elaborate planning for the property insurance market during the following three years, including such aspects as the transformation and development of the industry, the capability to serve the national economy, society, and the people’s livelihood, the level of opening-up and international influence, as well as regulatory policies, systems, and mechanisms. Regulation was strengthened for the development of insurance asset management product businesses. In September 2020, the CBIRC released a series of supportingprovisions of the Interim Measures for the Administration of Insurance Asset Management Products, which specify time limits for product registration and extend the scope of investment assets. Regulation of the investment management capabilities of insurance institutions was improved. In September 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Issues Concerning Improving the Regulation of the Investment Management Capabilities of Insurance Institutions and designed in detail the concrete standards for insurance institutions to build various investment management capabilities. 4. Enhancing coordinated supervision of the financial infrastructure In July 2020, the PBC and CSRC jointly released Announcement No. 7 [2020] of PBC and CSRC and approved interconnectivity cooperation between the relevant infrastructure institutions in the interbank bond market and the exchange bond market. The PBC and CSRC will strengthen regulatory cooperation and coordination to boost the free flow of factors in the bond market. 5. Promoting the opening-up of the bond market In September 2020, the PBC, CSRC and SAFE jointly drafted the Announcement on Issues Concerning Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Exposure Draft), which clarifies the overall institutional arrangements for the opening-up of China’s bond market and solicits market opinions on the arrangements facilitating overseas institutional investors to allocate RMB bond assets. In September 2020, FTSE Russell announced that it would add Chinese government bonds to its World Government Bond Index (WGBI) in October 2021. So far, all of the three global major bond index providers have or are planning to include China’s bonds in their relevant indexes, which fully reflects international investors’ confidence in the long-term sound development of China’s economy and the continuous opening-up of China’s financial sector.Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments 1. Economic and financial market performance in the major economies Overall, the global economy continued to recover, with the economic indicators improving marginally in some economies, but uncertainties remained for the future given the recent resurgence of COVID-19. In October the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised its global growth forecast to –4.4 percent for 2020 and 5.2 percent for 2021, up 0.8 percentage points and down 0.2 percentage points from its June forecast, respectively. In Q3, the annualized quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth rate bounced back to 33.1 percent in the US, while the year-on-year real GDP growth in the euro area and the U.K. posted –4.4 percent and –9.6 percent, with the drop declining by 10.4 and 11.9 percentage points, respectively. The emerging market economies also showed signs of recovery. The Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) rose in the major economies, with the manufacturing PMI in the US and the euro area both rebounding to above 50. Meanwhile, as global COVID-19 cases have recently resurged and the effectiveness of a vaccine still remains to be seen, we cannot ignore the risk of a new wave of the pandemic and its impact on the stability and development of the global economy in the future. Improvements in the labor market slowed, as more and more temporary unemployment is likely to become permanent. From April to September, the US unemployment rate dropped from 14.7 percent to 7.9 percent, but research shows that, although the temporary unemployment rate declined from 11.5 percent to 2.9 percent, the permanent unemployment rate rose from 3.2 percent to 5 percent. In the meantime, the unemployment rate rose from 7.4 percent to 8.3 percent in the euro area, from 2.6 percent to 3.0 percent in Japan, and from 4.0 percent to 4.8 percent in the U.K. A differentiation in the impact of the pandemic led to a divergence in price movements. The major developed economies continued to experience low inflation, and even deflation. In September, the year-on-year growth rate of the CPI posted 1.4, 0.5, 0 percent for the US, U.K., and Japan, respectively, while the year-on-year growth rate of the HICP in the euro area was reported to be –0.3 percent. Most emerging economies still have a positive inflation, while some countries’ inflationcontinues to run high. The global stock market continued to bounce back, but volatility also became larger. In the US, the Nasdaq and the S&P 500 recovered to their pre-pandemic level in early June and late August, respectively, with the Nasdaq hitting a current-year high in September. Major stock indexes in Germany, Japan, and the U.K. all rebounded significantly from the market low in March. Emerging market stocks have improved considerably, but most countries still have not recovered to their pre-pandemic level.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major economies maintained the intensity of their accommodative monetary policies. In Q3, the US Fed, the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England (BOE), and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) kept their ultra-low interest rates and the size of their asset purchases remained unchanged, while the size of their balance sheets remained at a high level. The US Fed and the BOE continued to revise their pandemic emergency liquidity facilities, including loosening the application requirements, expanding the terms, and enhancing the coverage and strength of the facilities. Trapped by the “low growth, low inflation, and low interest rate” deadlock, the central banks in the developed economies conducted assessments of their monetary policy framework in succession. After completing its new assessment, the US Fed declared it would revise its monetary policy framework in August, aiming to achieve an inflation rate that averages 2 percent, and it stated that the response of its monetary policy to real employment would depend on the shortfalls, instead of the deviations, from the maximum employment level, and employment judgments would be made based on multiple dimensions. In addition, the ECB and the Bank of Canada began their assessments of the monetary policy framework in January and August, respectively, which are expected to be completed in 2021. The central banks in the emerging market economies continued their rate cuts. In Q3, the Mexican central bank reduced its benchmark interest rates twice by a total of 75 bps. The central banks in Brazil, Russia, South Africa, Malaysia, and Indonesia cut their rates by 25 bps.3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, the duration of the global pandemic may exceed expectations. Recently, the newly confirmed cases climbed sharply across the globe. With a rebound in the US and Europe, and the expansion accelerating in some of the developing economies, the global pandemic might continue for a rather long time and might impact the global economic recovery. Second, the risks of fiscal sustainability are worth noting. In 2020, the US fiscal deficit budget hit a record high of USD3.1 trillion, more than twice that in 2009. According to the IMF, by September the global fiscal measures responding to the pandemic were about 12 percent of global GDP, and the global public debt ratio will approach 100 percent in 2020 and might continue to rise. The IMF called on governments to improve the efficiency of their fiscal expenditures and to solve the problems of huge fiscal deficits and public debts while promoting an economic recovery. Third, hidden financial risks are rising. The performance of financial markets has deviated from the economic fundamentals. Despite the fragilities in the recovery of the real economy and the shaky outlook for company earnings, the global stock market enjoyed a strong rebound, hence the risk of a reversal in the future. Non- banking financial institutions have prominent fragilities, with a noticeable liquidity mismatch. Once the financial markets experience dramatic fluctuations, they may face huge pressures to sell and such pressures may spread to the banking system. Box 4 China’s Macro Policy Vigorously Supported its Economic Recovery In 2020, a series of monetary and fiscal policies were adopted throughout the world to cushion the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and they have played a positive role in global economic stability and recovery. To effectively support pandemic containment and to promote economic and social development, China adopted various monetary and fiscal policy measures. Overall, China’s macro policies have maintained an appropriate intensity, which provide vigorous support for shoring up the real economy, effectively filling the supply gap of medical essentials and daily necessitiesfor global pandemic containment and other industrial products due to the impact of COVID-19, and making an important contribution to the economic recovery both at home and abroad. In responding to the pandemic and supporting the economic recovery, the debt scale and the leverage ratio will inevitably go up in stages, after which the gradual recovery of the economy will make possible a reasonable macro leverage ratio for the long term. After the outbreak of COVID-19, the PBC decisively launched RMB9 trillion of monetary policy response measures, which mainly include guiding the MLF rates and the OMO rates to move downward, releasing the dividends of a market-based interest rate system through the LPR reform, freeing up RMB1.75 trillion of long-term funds with three reductions of the RRR, providing RMB1.8 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts, and launching two monetary policy tools that directly support the real economy to bolster RMB4.7 trillion for the financing of micro and small businesses (MSBs). By adopting policies such as lowering interest rates, reducing fees, and deferring principal and interest repayments, the financial system has cut RMB1.25 trillion of its profits in favor of the real economy, expecting to realize the goal of RMB1.5 trillion for the entire year. Liquidity has been maintained at an adequate and reasonable level with implementation of the monetary policy. It is expected that RMB loans will increase by approximately RMB20 trillion and the AFRE will increase by over RMB30 trillion in 2020. Broad money and the AFRE outgrew those of 2019, representing the strong support of the financial sector to the real economy. Fiscal policy continued to take effect, which alleviated the impact of the pandemic on the real economy. The fiscal deficit in 2020 went up by RMB1 trillion over the previous year, RMB1 trillion of special government bonds for pandemic containment were issued, and RMB3.75 trillion of special local government bonds were also issued, with a year-on-year increase of RMB1.6 trillion. Albeit on a large base of fiscal policy in 2019, RMB3.6 trillion of additional fiscal support was provided through the above three measures. In addition, efforts were made to provide endogenous momentum for the overall recovery of the economy and society through tax cuts and fee reductions, increased expenditures in key areas, as well as enhanced guarantees and support for major projects. In terms of the domestic situation, the intensity of China’s macro policy responses has been appropriate. Measures have been taken precisely to deliver solid outcomes, andall the announced policies have been implemented promptly and thoroughly, yielding remarkable results. First, the pandemic has been brought under control, which is the basic premise for an economic recovery. China took the lead in containment of the pandemic among the major economies, cutting the daily increase in domestic coronavirus cases to single digits within about two months. The adoption of appropriate and reasonable macro policy measures is expected to vigorously bolster the economic recovery. In contrast, if the pandemic had not been effectively contained, an even stronger macro policy would not have fundamentally cushioned its devastating impact on the economy. Second, in accordance with the pace of the pandemic containment efforts, macro policy measures have been rolled out gradually at different levels based on the characteristics of pandemic containment and recovery of the economy and society at different stages. The macro policy took different focuses in the various stages of pandemic containment, which secured the provision of medical supplies and daily necessities, fostered the resumption of work and production, and speedily restored normal production and life. Third, as for policy implementation, China’s macro policies have been targeted precisely instead of indiscriminately injecting large amounts of liquidity. The PBC launched two monetary policy instruments that provide direct support for the real economy, i.e., an instrument supporting deferred repayments of inclusive MSB loans, and a support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans. The fiscal sector set up a new transfer payment mechanism to ensure that funds go straight to prefecture- and county-level governments, and it issued special government bonds for COVID-19 control to support pandemic containment and local infrastructure construction. Fourth, from the perspective of policy effects, China's economic and social development has been restored in a comprehensive manner. China’s GDP dropped by 6.8 percent in Q1, but grew by 3.2 percent and 4.9 percent in Q2 and Q3, respectively. China’s economy resumed positive growth during the first three quarters, with economic indicators, including consumption, investment, export, etc., picking up. From a global perspective, China’s macro policy responses have also maintained an appropriate intensity, which support a swift recovery of the economy and make an important contribution to the world economy. First, they have forestalled further contraction of the world economy. According to the IMF forecast, the world economy has been witnessing the worst recession since World War II, and it is expected to contract by 4.4 percent in 2020. China is the only one among the major economies to maintain a positive growth rate. It would not be possible to realize positive growth for the world economy in 2020 and 2021 as a whole without the positive growth of the Chinese economy. Second, China’s economic growth will have positive spillovereffects in the world, especially in fostering an economic recovery of its neighboring countries and its major trade partners. Third, amid the impact of the pandemic, China to some extent, has played the role of global supplier of the last resort, and it has established a foundation for pandemic containment as well as for an economic recovery throughout the world. China’s rapid resumption of production has filled the global supply gap of medical essentials and daily necessities for battling COVID-19 and other industrial production that has been impacted by the pandemic. It has provided massive essential supplies and intermediate goods necessary for a resumption of production to the world, and it has made a critical contribution to global pandemic containment and restoration of global industrial chains.II. Macroeconomic developments in China In the first three quarters of 2020, facing the severe shocks from COVID-19 and the complex situations at home and abroad, departments in all regions coordinated regular containment of the pandemic and economic and social development in a scientific way and vigorously and effectively promoted a resumption of production and order. As a result, the national economy continued to recover steadily. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in the first three quarters grew by 0.7 percent year on year on a comparable basis to RMB72.3 trillion, the growth of which turned positive. Specifically, GDP in Q3 grew by 4.9 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, CPI rose by 3.3 percent year on year. 1. Consumption gradually improved, and the growth of investments and foreign trade turned positive The growth of residents’ income in real terms turned positive and there was a gradually improving willingness to consume gradually. In the first three quarters, per capita disposable income registered RMB23,781, up 3.9 percent year on year in nominal terms. It grew by 0.6 percent in real terms year on year, registering positive growth for the first time in 2020. Residents’ income from wages and salaries remained stable, and growth of the per capita income of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q3, 23.5 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” up 0.2 percentage points from the previous quarter. In the first three quarters, total retail sales of consumer goods registered RMB27.3 trillion, down 7.2 percent year on year and a deceleration of 4.2 percentage points from H1 of 2020. In particular, growth in Q3 grew by 0.9 percent, registering positive quarterly growth for the first time in 2020. Sales of upgraded consumer goods and online retail sales continued to grow rapidly.The growth of fixed-asset investments turned positive, and investments in the hightech industry and social areas continued to rebound. In the first three quarters, total fixed-asset investments (excluding those by rural households) increased by 0.8 percent year on year to RMB43.7 trillion, registering positive growth for the first time in 2020. Current investments have exhibited the following characteristics. First, investments in the manufacturing sector and the infrastructure rebounded remarkably. The growth of investments in infrastructure turned positive for the first time in 2020, registering 0.2 percent in the first three quarters. In the first three quarters, investments in the manufacturing sector declined by 6.5 percent, a deceleration of 5.2 percentage points from H1, while private investments decreased by 1.5 percent to RMB24.4 trillion, a deceleration of 5.8 percentage points from H1. Second, the growth of investments in the high-tech industry accelerated. In the first three quarters, investments in the hightech industry grew by 9.1 percent, an acceleration of 2.8 percentage points from H1. Third, investments in social areas rebounded. In the first three quarters, investments in social areas increased by 9.2 percent, an acceleration of 3.9 percentage points from H1. Specifically, investments in the areas of health care and education grew by 20.3 percent and 12.7 percent, respectively. Imports and exports outperformed expectations, and the trade structure continued to improve. In the first three quarters, imports and exports grew by 0.7 percent year on year, an acceleration of 3.9 percentage points from H1. Specifically, imports and exports in Q3 grew by 7.5 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, the growth of exports registered 1.8 percent, 4.8 percentage points higher than that in H1, while imports decreased by 0.6 percent, a deceleration of 2.7 percentage points from H1. As a result, there was a trade surplus of RMB2.3 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, and the share of imports and exports under general trade and in the private sector increased. In terms of the commodities structure, the share of exports of machinery and electronics in total exports increased somewhat, and exports of medical equipment and supplies related to pandemic containment grew rapidly. In terms of trade partners, ASEAN became China’s largest trade partner. In the first three quarters, China’s trading volume with ASEAN grew by 7.7 percent to RMB3.38 trillion, accounting for 14.6 percent of the total volume of China’s foreign trade, up 0.9 percentage points from the same period of 2019. The concentration of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the high-tech industry accelerated. In the first three quarters, actually utilized FDI increased by 5.2 percentyear on year to RMB718.81 billion, the growth of which turned positive. Specifically, the growth of actually utilized FDI in Q3 posted 20.4 percent, far outpacing the –10.8 percent in Q1 and the 8.4 percent in Q2. In terms of the industrial distribution, the concentration of FDI in the high-tech industry accelerated. In the first three quarters, actually utilized foreign investment in the high-tech service industry grew by 26.4 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, non-financial outward direct investments by domestic investors edged down by 0.6 percent year on year to RMB551.51 billion, registering a slight deceleration. Specifically, non-financial outward direct investments in the countries along the Belt and Road reached USD13.02 billion, up 29.7 percent year on year. In particular, outward investments in the leasing/commercial services industry and the wholesale/retail industry witnessed year-on-year growth of 18.6 percent and 41.1 percent, respectively. 2. Agricultural production was fairly satisfactory, industrial production accelerated, and the service industry recovered steadily The share of tertiary industry in total industry continued to increase. In the first three quarters, the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 2.3 percent, 0.9 percent, and 0.4 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 6.7 percent, 37.9 percent, and 55.4 percent of GDP. The share of the tertiary industry in total industry surpassed that of the secondary industry by 17.5 percentage points, up 1.2 percentage points from the same period of 2019. Agricultural production was fairly satisfactory. In the first three quarters, the value- added of agriculture grew by 3.8 percent year on year, which was on par with that in H1. Specifically, the value-added of agriculture in Q3 grew by 3.9 percent. As the sowing areas of autumn crops increased amidst stability and the major autumn crops on the whole grew well, it was expected that there would be another bumper autumn crop harvest . Hog production capacity gradually rebounded. At end-Q3, hogs in stock grew by 20.7 percent year on year to total 370.39 million. Industrial production accelerated. The value-added of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) in the first three quarters increased by 1.2 percent year on year, while that in H1 decreased by 1.3 percent. Specifically, IEDS grew by 5.8percent in Q3, accelerating by 1.4 percentage points from Q2. According to a survey of 5,000 entrepreneurs, conducted in Q3 by the PBC, the Business Climate Index and the Profitability Index posted 49.4 percent and 57.0 percent, respectively, up 6.6 percentage points and 7.3 percentage points from Q2. The service industry recovered steadily, and the modern service industry showed sound growth momentum. In Q3, the value-added of the service industry grew by 4.3 percent year on year, accelerating by 2.4 percentage points from Q2. In the first three quarters, the Index of Service Production (ISP) fell by 2.6 percent year on year, decelerating by 3.5 percentage points from H1. In September, the Commercial Activities Indexes for transportation, telecommunications/Internet software, and the accommodations/catering industries remained above 60 percent. The Expected Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 62.2 percent, up 0.9 percentage points from that in August, demonstrating the stronger confidence of enterprises in the development of the market. 3. The growth of consumer prices decelerated slightly, and the decline in producer prices narrowed The growth of consumer prices decelerated slightly. In Q3, the CPI rose by 2.3 percent year on year, witnessing a deceleration of 0.4 percentage points from the previous quarter. Specifically, CPI growth registered 2.7 percent, 2.4 percent, and 1.7 percent in July, August, and September, respectively. Due to factors such as the stabilization of pork prices and the base figure effect, the growth of food prices decelerated by 1.4 percentage points from Q2, registering year-on-year growth of 10.8 percent in Q3. The growth of non-food prices decelerated slightly, with the prices of consumer goods and services both decelerating. The decline in producer prices decelerated. In Q3, the Producer Price Index (PPI) dropped by 2.2 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.1 percentage points compared with Q2. Specifically, the year-on-year decline of producer prices in July, August, and September dropped by 2.4 percent, 2.0 percent, and 2.1 percent, respectively. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) dropped by 2.7 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.7 percentage points from the previous quarter. In the first three quarters, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC decreased by 1.4 percent year on year, which was on par with that in H1.4. The decline of fiscal revenue decelerated, and employment was generally stable The decline of fiscal revenue decelerated. In the first three quarters, revenue in the national general public budget dropped by 6.4 percent year on year to RMB14.1 trillion, decelerating by 4.4 percentage points compared with H1. Specifically, tax revenue amounted to RMB11.9 trillion, down 6.4 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue reached RMB2.2 trillion, down 6.7 percent year on year. The domestic value- added tax, domestic consumption tax, and business income tax dropped by 13.5 percent, 5 percent, and 4.9 percent year on year, respectively, while the personal income tax increased by 7.3 percent year on year. Fiscal expenditures rebounded gradually. In the first three quarters, expenditures in the national general budget saw a decline of 1.9 percent year on year to RMB17.5 trillion. Growth accelerated by 3.9 percentage points compared with H1 and decelerated by 11.3 percentage points from the same period of 2019. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures related to health care and social security/employment grew steadily, registering year-on-year growth of 4 percent and 8.2 percent, respectively. Expenditures in the business/services industry and resource exploration/industrial information and other areas rose substantially, registering year- on-year growth of 24.5 percent and 20.9 percent, respectively. In the first three quarters, budgetary revenue from nationwide government-managed funds totaled RMB5.5 trillion, up 3.8 percent year on year. Specifically, revenue from land sales rose by 10.3 percent year on year. Budgetary expenditures from nationwide government-managed funds increased by 26.6 percent year on year to RMB7.8 trillion. Employment was generally stable. In the first three quarters, 8.98 million people were newly employed, accomplishing 99.8 percent of the annual target. In September, the surveyed unemployment rate in urban areas was 5.4 percent, down 0.2 percentage points from August. Specifically, the unemployment rate of the surveyed employees between the ages of 25 and 59 years old posted 4.8 percent, 0.6 percentage points lower than that in the urban areas, on par with that in August. The average weekly working hours of employees of enterprises were 46.8 hours, increasing by 0.1 hour year on year. As of end-Q3, the number of rural migrants decreased by 2.1 percent year on year to 179.52 million, down 3.84 million from the same period of 2019.5. The balance of payments and external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. According to preliminary statistics, China’s current account surplus stood at USD170.7 billion in the first three quarters. To be specific, the surplus in trade in goods was USD339.8 billion, whereas the deficit in trade in services was USD116.9 billion. Under the capital and financial account, the surplus in direct investments reached USD44.9 billion. At end-September, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.1426 trillion, increasing by USD34.6 billion from end-2019. At end-June, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.1324 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt balance was USD1.2234 trillion, accounting for 57 percent of the total external debt balance. 6. Analysis by sector 6.1 The real estate sector In Q3 2020, nationwide housing prices remained generally stable. Housing sales and investments in real estate development gradually recovered. In September, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built housing prices increased by 4.5 percent year on year, decelerating 0.4 percentage points from those in June. Second-hand residential housing prices increased by 2.2 percent year on year, basically on par with those in June. In the first three quarters, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 1.8 percent year on year, while housing sales increased by 3.7 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development gradually recovered. In the first three quarters, investments in real estate development grew by 5.6 percent year on year, accelerating by 3.7 percentage points from H1. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 6.1 percent year on year, registering an acceleration of 3.5 percentage points from H1, accounting for 74.0 percent of total investments in real estate development.The growth of real estate loans continued to decelerate. At end-September, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) stood at RMB48.8 trillion, up 12.8 percent year on year and a deceleration of 0.3 percentage points from end-June. Outstanding real estate loans made up 28.8 percent of the total lending balance. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans amounted to RMB33.7 trillion, up 15.6 percent year on year, representing a deceleration of 0.1 percentage points from end-June. Outstanding housing development loans posted RMB9.3 trillion, a rise of 11.4 percent year on year and a deceleration of 0.6 percentage points from end-June. 6.2 The civil aviation sector In recent years, the civil aviation industry in China has seen rapid growth with an expanding industrial scale. There has been marked improvement in aviation safety, steady enhancement in the quality of development, and continuous enhancement of transport efficiency and the security capability of this industry, and it is playing a more important role in society. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic hit the civil aviation industry severely. The CBRC, jointly with the PBC and the Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), introduced a special support policy of emergency loans for aviation enterprises locked in difficulties. In line with the principle of adopting differentiated measures and providing a credit supply with precision, the PBC provided special central bank lending, and the development banks and large banks issued preferential loans to bail out some of the troubled civil aviation enterprises. These measures effectively cushioned the impact of the pandemic and helped enterprises tide over the difficulties. As significant strategic results were achieved in coordinating pandemic containment with economic and social development, the civil aviation industry showed an overall rebounding trend. First,the transport and operation of the civil aviation industry recovered steadily. In Q3, total transport turnover of the civil aviation industry decreased by 32.4 percent year on year, decelerating by 14.2 percentage points and 19.3 percentage points from Q1 and Q2, respectively. Second, passenger traffic and cargo/mail traffic continued to rebound. Passenger traffic decreased by 24.0 percent year on year, decelerating by 30.0 percentage points and 30.5 percentage points from Q1 and Q2, respectively. Cargo and mail traffic decreased by 8.8 percent year on year, decelerating by 8.6 percentage points and 3.6 percentage points from Q1 and Q2, respectively. Third, transport efficiency continuously increased. In the first three quarters, with the gradual recovery of demand in the civil aviation market, the passenger load factor for scheduled flights, the weight load factor for scheduled flights, and the average daily use rate of aircraft decreased by 11.6 percent, 5.5 percent, and 3.4 percent, respectively, decelerating by 3.2 percentage points, 1.6 percentage points, and 0.7 percentage points from H1, respectively.Meanwhile, the development of China’s civil aviation industry still faces multiple challenges. First, factors such as the improper distribution of airspace resources, fairly slow development of infrastructure construction, a shortage of professionals, uncompetitive enterprises, and an inefficient management system have restricted the sustainable development of the civil aviation industry. Second, pressures of energy savings and environmental protection on the civil aviation industry are increasing, and the tasks of changing the development mode and realizing green and low-carbondevelopment are becoming more arduous. Third, the surging growth of e-commerce, delivery, and modern logistics has put forward higher requirements on air cargo. Fourth, due to the lack of a growth momentum in the global economy and trade, rising protectionism, and geopolitical tensions, plus the fallout from COVID-19, competition in terms of transport services in the civil aviation industry is becoming fiercer around the world. Going forward, efforts should be made to build a safe, convenient, efficient and green modern civil aviation system while continuing to contain the pandemic. On the one hand, efforts should be made to strengthen the planning and construction of airports, to reasonably utilize airspace and other resources, to scientifically plan and arrange domestic route networks, to promote the development of air cargo facilities, and to continuously enhance the quality of transport services and aviation safety. On the other hand, efforts should also be made to deepen the reform of the civil aviation industry, to enhance its ability to innovate, to strengthen personnel training, to accelerate construction of a green civil aviation, and to enhance international competitiveness. Part 5 Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy Since the beginning of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has dealt a heavy blow to China’s economic and social development. Under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee, the entire nation has worked as one and has achieved significant results in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development. Economic growth has been better than expected, the balance between supply and demand has gradually improved, and the market has seen more vitality and stronger growth drivers. Economic growth in Q1–Q3 turned from negative to positive, with growth in Q3 recording 4.9 percent, making it highly probable that the economy will see positive growth for 2020. Looking beyond the near term, the fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run and high-quality development remain unchanged.At present, China has entered a stage of high-quality development, and there are numerous advantages and conditions sustaining its future development. The pandemic containment and economic recovery in China are among the fastest in the world. With demand mostly having recovered and supply growing at a faster pace, employment and the people’s well-being are secured, and market expectations are generally stable. According to forecasts by the IMF, China will be the only major economy to record positive growth in 2020. In the current and next period, China’s development is still at an important stage of strategic opportunities. The economy still has great potential, strong resilience and vitality, and ample room for maneuver. With the deepening of the supply-side structural reforms as well as the full implementation of the innovation-driven development strategy and the strategy of expanding domestic demand, various new industries, business models and growth drivers are taking shape and rapidly developing. The numerous advantages and conditions supporting longterm growth remain unchanged. The financial sector has continuously enhanced its support for the real economy, especially for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and private businesses. With prudent and decisive measures to prevent and control financial risks, the financial system has been generally sound and capable of defusing various risks. The RMB exchange rate has been basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and the foreign exchange reserves remained above USD3 trillion. The economy has strengthened its capability to address external shocks. As the global environment becomes more complex, instabilities and uncertainties have increased significantly, posing numerous challenges for the domestic economy. Since Q3, recovery has been weak in the major economies. As the pandemic has resurged in some economies, the public sectors and industries have been exposed to rising debt, which seriously undermined the sustainability of fiscal policies. Capital market prices are detached from economic fundamentals, and excessively loose monetary policies have led to spillovers. Meanwhile, with protectionism and unilateralism gaining ground, geopolitical tensions have resurfaced and trade frictions among some countries are intensifying. Global industrial and supply chains are suffering from the severe impact of non-economic factors, causing major instabilities and uncertainties in economic recovery. As such, China is still under great pressures in preventing imported infection and risks related to the global economy and financial markets. To offset the impact of the pandemic, countercyclical adjustments increased in H1, and the macro leverage ratio displayed a temporary rise. Looking forward, however, the macro leverage ratio is likely to stabilize as economic growth gradually returns to its potential levels. In addition, the time lag between thepandemic outbreak and the attendant financial risks places upward pressures on future nonperforming loans. With regard to structural, institutional and cyclical concerns in the economy, as well as prominent issues of uneven development and underdevelopment, it is necessary to develop a deep understanding and dialectical view, and to enhance opportunity and risk awareness. The PBC will focus on taking care of its own matters by properly handling the relationship between reforms and macro-management, short-term and long-term considerations as well as internal and external equilibrium, so as to achieve high-quality development. Consumer price growth continued its overall downward trend, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. In July and August 2020, due to the impact of floods in some provinces, the prices of meat and vegetables saw a rebound. But as multiple measures were taken by government departments to guarantee supply and stabilize prices and monetary policy remained sound, prices have recently declined. CPI growth in September fell to below 2 percent. According to preliminary estimates, the average growth of the CPI in 2020 will fall within a reasonable range. Industrial production continued to recover, with domestic and external demand gradually regaining ground. The PPI recorded positive monthly growth throughout Q3, while its negative year-on-year growth exhibited an overall narrowing trend. However, as the global pandemic unfolds, in light of the uncertain impact of the containment measures on supply chains, as well as the base effect and holiday disruptions on the CPI, it is necessary to pay close attention to short-term price movements. From medium and long-term perspectives, China’s economic performance is generally stable, aggregate supply and demand are basically in equilibrium, the supply-side structural reforms are being further advanced, the market mechanism is playing a better role, monetary policies remain sound, and monetary conditions are reasonable and adequate, providing no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, the PBC will continue to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and resolutely implement the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. It will coordinate ongoing pandemic control with economic and social development, and it will make every effort to ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment andexpectations, to maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, people's basic livelihood, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains and the normal functioning of primary-level governments, and to successfully wrap up the 13th Five-Year Plan, thereby giving utmost support to achieving the target of completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. At the same time, the PBC will focus on thoroughly implementing the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee by understanding the new development stage, applying the new development philosophy, establishing the new development paradigm, improving macroeconomic governance, conducting cross-cyclical policy design, and promoting a balance of economic aggregates, structural optimization as well as both internal and external equilibria. Moreover, work will be done to build a modern central banking system, to improve the mechanism of money supply management, to enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, and to build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the economy. The sound monetary policy will be more flexible, appropriate and targeted, better adapted to the needs of high-quality economic development, and more focused on the quality and efficiency of the provision of financial services for the real economy. The PBC will improve the mechanism of money supply management to manage scientifically the intensity, pace and focus of monetary policy operations in line with the macro situation and market needs. By so doing, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level to avoid a liquidity crunch in the market while firmly refraining from adopting broad and indiscriminate stimulus measures so that a liquidity spillover will not occur. The PBC will work to enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, deepen the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, continue to unleash the potential of reform in lowering lending rates, adopt a combination of policies to significantly reduce social financing costs, and give play to the decisive role of the market in the RMB exchange rate formation. The role of structural monetary policy tools in targeted liquidity provision will be enhanced so that policy measures can provide more direct support for the real economy. The PBC will attach importance to managing expectations and keeping prices stable. It will properly handle the relationship between internal and external equilibria and that between short-term and long-term goals, conduct a normal monetary policy as long as possible, and keep the macro leverage ratio basically stable. Efforts will be made to fight the tough battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks, to improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warnings, resolution and accountability, and to safeguard financial security by firmly defending the bottom line that no systemic riskshould occur. Work will be done to guide and create new demand with innovations and high-quality supply and to accelerate the establishment of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulation reinforcing each other. First, the PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is more flexible, appropriate and targeted. It will improve the mechanism of money supply management and employ a mix of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), open market operations (OMOs), central bank lending, and central bank discounts to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to properly control the general valve of money supply, so that the growth rates of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be basically in line with that of nominal GDP which reflects potential output, thereby supporting the return of the economy to its potential growth rate. Work will be done to guide the market rates to move smoothly around OMO rates and MLF rates. Moreover, the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment will be improved, with increased support for the issuance by small and medium-sized banks of capital replenishment instruments, such as perpetual bonds, so that banks will be better able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Measures will be taken to improve macroeconomic governance, to optimize monetary policy objectives as well as fiscal, employment, industry, investment, consumption, environmental protection, regional and other policy objectives, and to promote a reasonable division of duties and an efficient synergy. Second, to strengthen financial support for stabilizing businesses and securing employment, the PBC will move further ahead with the implementation of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy, and will effectively bring into play their propelling force. It will maintain the stability of central bank lending and central bank discount policies while providing inclusive and sustained financing support for agro-linked enterprises, micro and small businesses (MSBs), private enterprises, and industries severely affected by the pandemic. Active steps will be taken to promote the two monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy, to improve the effectiveness of targeted adjustments, and to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to step up credit support for inclusive MSBs that keep their employment basically stable. Concrete efforts will be made to alleviate the pressures on MSBs caused by principal and interest repayments and to ease their financing difficulties. The financial sector will be guided to meet the target of givingThird, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. It will innovate and improve the system of structural monetary policy tools, design the incentive compatibility mechanism in a targeted way, and guide financial institutions to ramp up support for those fields in conformity with the new development philosophy. Work will be done to improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, to promote the industrialization and large-scale application of new technologies, and to develop fund chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby giving rise to a virtuous cycle and triangular interactions among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector, and industries. The PBC will push ahead with the regulated development and innovation of supply chain finance by implementing supporting policies step by step in collaboration with the relevant agencies and providing targeted services to support the completeness and stability of supply chains and industrial chains. The rural financial services system will be improved. Research will be conducted on the linkup between financial support for poverty eradication and rural revitalization policies. Work will be accelerated to roll out measures for the assessment of the services of commercial banks for rural revitalization. The PBC will urge commercial banks to improve their internal resource allocations as well as their performance assessments. Measures will be taken to establish and improve the long-term mechanism for increasing bank lending to MSBs, to guide financial institutions to step up credit support for MSBs, private enterprises, the agricultural sector, rural areas, farmers as well as the manufacturing sector, to enhance Fintech, and to reinforce financial inclusion. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices as well as expectations, maintain the continuity, consistency and stability of real estate finance policies, and effectively implement rules for the prudential management of real estate finance. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform and the exchange rate reform to increase the efficiency of financial resource allocations. It will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, with the LPR reform continuing to go deeper. The market-oriented LPR pricing mechanism will be consolidated. The PBC will urge financial institutions to better incorporate the LPR into the funds transfer pricing (FTP) of loans and to strengthen the interconnections between the LPR and both the internal and external pricing of loans, thereby further bringing down the financing costs by means of reform and increasing the efficiency of monetary policy transmission. The selfregulatory mechanism for market rate pricing will play its part in regulating the conduct of deposit rate pricing and in reinforcing the requirement that lending entities of all types give explicit indications of annualized loan rates, in a move to maintain the fairness of pricing, safeguard a level playing field in the market, and protect the rights and interests of consumers. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, maintain the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and explore the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. Work will be done to stabilize market expectations and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Development of the foreign exchange market will pick up pace. Enterprises will be guided to be neutral in financial management and manage exchange rate risks with foreign exchange derivatives, while financial institutions will be guided to always be risk neutral and to provide services of exchange rate risk management for import and export companies with authentic needs. The PBC will steadily advance the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and further facilitate the use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment. Fifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental institution building in financial markets so that they can play an effective role in stabilizing growth, promoting structural adjustments, advancing reform, and guarding against risks. Active steps will be taken to improve the bond market management system and push for the unification of standards for information disclosures regarding corporate debenture bonds. The mechanism of bond default risk prevention and resolution will be improved in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. The PBC will enhance coordinated regulation over financial market infrastructures, put into practice the arrangements for interconnectivity between bond market infrastructures, and continue to push forward with the building of custodian banks and trade repositories so as to ensure that financial markets are generally safe and stable while performing efficiently. Active but prudent steps will be taken to promote the opening-up of the bond market. In terms of bond market access, channels will be integrated and procedures will be optimized so that the environment for overseas investors will be more friendly and convenient.Sixth, the PBC will push further ahead with the reform of financial institutions and make continued efforts to improve corporate governance and optimize financial supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, the reform of state-owned commercial banks will go deeper, and a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics will be established to increase efficiency and provide better services for MSBs and private enterprises. Work will be done to support the sustainable and sound development of small and medium-sized banks and rural credit cooperatives by improving monetary, regulatory and tax rules so that they can reassume their roles in serving local needs and their original purposes. An effective mechanism of checks and balances in governance will be established, and the long-term mechanism for capital replenishment will be improved. Measures will be taken to reform and optimize the policy financial sector by carrying out separate account management of businesses as well as classified accounting in a move to enhance their capacity to support the national strategy. Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warnings, resolution and accountability. It will safeguard financial security and fight the tough battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. The system of financial risk prevention and early warnings will be improved, and stress tests fully covering the banking system will be conducted. To improve the soundness of financial institutions and their sustainable management capacity, the PBC will support banks, particularly small and medium-sized banks, to replenish capital through multiple channels and improve their governance, and to step up efforts to set aside loss provisions for non- performing loans and carry out write-offs. Work will be done vigorously to develop regulatory technologies and enhance the professionalism, effectiveness and seriousness of regulation. While the endeavors to defuse risks will be advanced prudently, under no circumstances will local risks be allowed to evolve into systemic risks, nor will regional risks be allowed to evolve into national risks. Meanwhile, the PBC will accelerate steps to improve the system of accountability for financial risk resolution so as to ensure that shareholders, creditors of different types, local governments and financial regulatory agencies assume their respective responsibilities. Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2020, the People's Bank of China (PBC) has resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Under a sound monetary policy which is more flexible, appropriate and targeted, this year witnessed a reasonable growth in money and credit and aggregate financing, a further improved structure, and a significant drop in overall financing costs for enterprises. Buttressed by the realization of monetary policy goals, China took the lead in pandemic containment and the resumption of work and production, and became the first economy to post positive growth. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In 2020, amid the impact of the pandemic and the complicated economic conditions at home and abroad, there was much more uncertainty about liquidity demand and supply in the banking system. Based on the characteristics of pandemic containment and recovery of the economy and society at different stages, the PBC timely adjusted the intensity and pace, and comprehensively used rich policy tools, to keep the total liquidity in line with market demands, including reserve requirement ratio (RRR) cuts, central bank lending, central bank discounts, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), and open market operations (OMOs). These measures not only helped ensure stable performance of the financial system and satisfy emergency demands for liquidity arising from guaranteeing supplies and resuming work and production during the outbreak of the pandemic but also gradually restored total liquidity to its normal level during the course of the economic and social recovery. In the meanwhile, by announcing monetary policy arrangements in advance and other means, the PBC strengthened expectation management and ironed out short-term disturbances in a timely manner. Money-market interest rates were guided to move around the OMO rates, and policy rates were fully exploited as a pivot. Stable market expectations enabled financial institutions to trim down their preventive demands for liquidity. At end-December, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 2.2 percent, down 0.3 percentage points from the end of the previous year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the credit structure optimized and the lending rates moving downwards Credit provided stronger support for the real economy at a reasonable pace. Outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 12.5 percent year on year to RMB178.4 trillion at end-2020, increasing RMB19.8 trillion from the beginning of the year and RMB3.0 trillion more than the increase in the corresponding period of 2019. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 12.8 percent year on year to RMB172.7 trillion, up RMB19.6 trillion from the beginning of the year and an increase that was RMB2.8 trillion larger than that during the corresponding period of the previous year. In response to the pandemic, financial institutions increased their loans in the first half of 2020, especially in the first quarter. After the economy gradually recovered, credit expansion returned to normal, and it changed in small increments during the second half of 2020, basically flat compared with the previous year. Over the past four quarters of 2020, loans increased RMB7.1 trillion, RMB5.0 trillion, RMB4.2 trillion, RMB3.4 trillion respectively, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.3 trillion, RMB1.1 trillion, RMB211.1 billion, RMB191.1 billion, stabilizing quarter by quarter. The credit structure continued to be optimized. Medium and long-term loans to themanufacturing sector and loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) recorded a rapid growth. At end-2020, loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB12.2 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB2.7 trillion. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector gained 35.2 percent, accelerating for fourteen consecutive months. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 30.3 percent year on year to RMB15.1 trillion, 7.2 percentage points higher than that at end-2019. These loans supported 32.28 million MSBs, an increase of 19.4 percent year on year. In 2020, inclusive loans to MSBs increased by RMB3.5 trillion, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion. The weighted average interest rates on loans hit a record low. In 2020, with the deepening of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, the implicit floor of loan rates was completely removed and the efficiency of the transmission of monetary policy was further enhanced. The low lending rates created favorable conditions for financial institutions to waive profits of RMB1.5 trillion in favor of the real economy. In December 2020, the one-year LPR fell by 0.3 percentage points from December 2019 to 3.85 percent, and the over-five-year LPR fell by 0.15 percentage points to 4.65 percent. The weighted average lending rate recorded 5.03 percent, down 0.41 percentage points year on year, falling to a record low. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 5.30 percent, down 0.44 percentage points year on year. The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.51 percentage points from December 2019 to 4.61 percent, a drop clearly exceeding that of the LPR, breaking the record for the second successive month. This shows the role that the LPR plays in indicating direction and guidance. In December 2020, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 66.04 percent, 7.02 percent, and 26.93 percent, respectively. In general, the upward and downward float of the loan rates around the LPR moved downward as a whole compared with that in December 2019.The sustained easy monetary policies of the developed economies prompted a decrease in the interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans. In December 2020, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.16 percent and 0.59 percent, respectively, down 0.14 percentage points and 1.34 percentage points year on year. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.22 percent and 1.36 percent, down 1.79 percentage points and 1.65 percentage points year on year, respectivelyDeposits grew rapidly. At end-2020, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB218.4 trillion, up 10.2 percent year on year, 1.6 percentage points higher than those at the end of the previous year. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB212.6 trillion, up 10.2 percent year on year, 1.5 percentage points higher than those at the end of the previous year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD889.3 billion, an increase of USD131.5 billion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of USD101.3 billion year on year. Box 1 Strengthening Deposit Management and Safeguarding Competitive Order in the Deposit Market Safeguarding competitive order in the deposit market is conducive to maintaining a reasonable and stable cost for financial institutions to assume debt, cutting down on social financing costs, and creating favorable conditions for the orderly promotion of the market-based interest rate reform. The PBC attaches great importance to strengthening deposit management. In accordance with the Regulations on the Administration of Savings, the Administrative Measures for RMB Corporate Deposits, and other relevant provisions, the PBC issued the Notice of the PBC on Strengtheningthe Administration of Deposit Interest Rates (Yinfa No.59 [2020]), requiring financial institutions to strictly implement the provisions on setting deposit interest rates as well as calculating and settling interest. Moreover, the PBC guides the Self-discipline Mechanism for Market Interest Rate Pricing (referred to as the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism) to implement self-discipline management of deposit interest rates so as to maintain orderly competition in the deposit market. First, urging the rectification of non-compliant deposit innovations. Prior to 2019, in order to absorb deposits, some financial institutions issued so-called “innovative” products, such as demand deposit products with interest calculated upon withdrawal with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, time deposit products withdrawn in advance with interest calculated with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, and time deposit products with periodic interest payments. These products, whose actual interest rates are obviously higher than the deposit rates with the same maturities, violate the regulations that time deposits withdrawn in advance are deemed to be current deposits when calculating the interest, and the principal and interest of lump-sum time deposits are due to be repaid in lump sums at maturity. In order to maintain orderly competition in the deposit market, since 2019 the PBC has guided the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism to reinforce self-discipline management of the deposit market, and it has urged financial institutions to operate in accordance with the laws and regulations and to rectify non-compliant deposit innovations in an orderly manner. In terms of demand deposit products with interest calculated with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, the outstanding balance before the rectification (as of May 16, 2019) stood at RMB6.7 trillion. Financial institutions were required to make rectifications gradually from May 17, 2019 and halted new businesses from December 1, 2019, with the balance maturing naturally. As of end-2020, the outstanding balance of the products registered RMB1.2 trillion, a remarkable drop of RMB5.5 trillion, or over 81 percent, as compared with that before the rectification. As for time deposit products withdrawn in advance with interest calculated with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, the outstanding balance posted RMB15.4 trillion before the rectification (as of December 16, 2019). Financial institutions were required to stop new businesses immediately from December 17, 2019, and to bring the balance to zero by the end of 2020. In order to implement the rectification requirements, some banks announced in December 2020 that the interest calculation rules of these time deposit products withdrawn in advance would be adjusted from January 1, 2021 and they made it clear that interest on time deposit products withdrawn in advance would be calculated with reference to the interest rate of demand deposits. As of end-2020, the balance of these time deposit products had been reduced to zero, a total drop of RMB15.4 trillion. Second, bringing the guaranteed yield of structural deposits under self-discipline management. The yield of structural deposits generally consists of a guaranteed yield and the yield linked to derivatives, the former of which is the same as the interest rateof common deposits. However, in order to attract customers, some financial institutions set a relatively high guaranteed yield for structural deposits, which, to some extent, disturbed competitive order in the deposit market. With the aim of promoting the regulated and orderly development of structural deposits, in December 2019, the PBC guided the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism to incorporate the guaranteed yield of structural deposits into the self-discipline management, and urged banks to set the interest rates at a reasonable level. Moreover, the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) also took measures to foster the orderly development of the structural deposit business by banks. In December 2020, the guaranteed yield of structural deposits stood at 1.25 percent, 1.18 percentage points lower as compared with that in December 2019. In the meanwhile, the overall expected yield and redemption yield of structural deposits witnessed a rapid decline of 0.5 percentage points and 0.54 percentage points from December 2019 to reach 3.09 percent and 3.03 percent in December 2020, respectively. At end-2020, the outstanding balance of structural deposits amounted to RMB6.3 trillion, RMB4.4 trillion less than the peak of RMB10.7 trillion in April 2020. Third, strengthening the management of non-local deposits. Non-local deposits refer to deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks through accounts opened in regions or cities where they have not set up physical outlets, including deposits taken via third-party Internet platforms or through their own online banking and mobile banking platforms or other channels. In the past two years, some locally incorporated banks witnessed rapid expansion by absorbing non-local deposits, which deviated from their positioning of serving local communities. As non-local deposits lack stability, the accumulated liquidity risks are prone to rapid spreading, jeopardizing the competitive order in the market and the stability of the financial system. In order to guide locally incorporated banks to better serve the local communities and to maintain competitive order in the market, the PBC will, starting from Q1 2021, incorporate non-local deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks into the macro-prudential assessment (MPA), and forbid locally incorporated banks from absorbing non-local deposits through various channels, with the outstanding balance settled when coming due. The provision does not apply to banks operating wholly online without physical outlets. As their business is free of geographical constraints, they are essentially nationwide banks. Therefore, they are regulated by the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism with reference to state-owned banks. As the cornerstone of the interest-rate system, the deposit benchmark interest rate will remain in place for a long time. Going forward, the PBC will continue to bring the role of the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism into play, strengthen the management of non-compliant deposit innovations, structural deposits, and non-local deposits, prevent irrational competition, safeguard orderly competition in the deposit market, and maintain a stable cost for banks in assuming debts so as to create a favorable environment for promoting the market-based interest rate reform and fostering the steady decline of the comprehensive funding costs of enterprises.III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at a reasonable rate At end-2020, outstanding M2 recorded RMB218.7 trillion, up 10.1 percent year on year, an acceleration of 1.4 percentage points from the end of 2019. Outstanding M1 registered RMB62.6 trillion, a year-on-year growth of 8.6 percent and 4.2 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding M0 reached RMB8.4 trillion, up 9.2 percent year on year and an increase of 3.8 percentage points from the end of 2019. The year 2020 witnessed a net cash injection into the economy of RMB712.5 billion, a rise of RMB314.4 billion year on year. According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) reached RMB284.83 trillion at end-2020, up 13.3 percent year on year and an acceleration of 2.6 percentage points over the end of the previous year. In 2020, the incremental AFRE reached RMB34.86 trillion on a cumulative basis, an increase of RMB9.19 trillion year on year. The following features characterized the growth of the AFRE. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-year increase. Second, the drop in entrusted loans narrowed and the growth in undiscounted bankers’ acceptances expanded. Third, both corporate bonds and equity financing increased considerably compared with the previous year. Fourth, government bond financing recorded a significantly larger year-on-year increase. Fifth, the increase in asset-backed securities of depository financial institutions narrowed from the previous year, while the growth of written-off loans accelerated.IV. The RMB exchange rate fluctuated, and cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow In 2020, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations being generally stable. Basedon market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In the first five months, both China and other economies were hindered by the COVID-19 pandemic and the international foreign exchange market experienced greater fluctuations. Consequently, the RMB exchange rate depreciated against the USD and appreciated slightly against the basket of currencies. After June, China took the lead in containing the pandemic, and economic fundamentals continued to improve. As a result, the RMB exchange rate appreciated against both the USD and the basket of currencies. The year 2020 witnessed increased RMB exchange rate elasticity that served an effective role in regulating the macro-economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. At end-2020, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 94.84 and 94.23, respectively, up 3.78 percent and 2.64 percent from end-2019. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), at end-2020, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 4.05 percent and 3.33 percent from end-2019, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism commenced to end-2020, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated by 37.67 percent and 51.32 percent, respectively. At end-2020, the central parity of the RMB against the USD was 6.5249, up 6.92 percent from end-2019, appreciating by 26.84 percent on a cumulative basis from the launch of the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism in 2005. In 2020, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rate against the USD was 4.5 percent. In 2020, cross-border RMB settlements totaled RMB28.4 trillion, up 44 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB14.1 trillion and RMB14.3 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 13 percent year on year to RMB6.8 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB4.8 trillion whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and other items registered RMB2 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account posted RMB21.6 trillion, up 59 percent year on year.Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In 2020, in the face of COVID-19, a pandemic unseen in a century, the PBC has upheld the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, adhered to the fundamental method of scientific decision-making and innovative response, and adopted a sound monetary policy in a flexible, appropriate, and targeted manner. The PBC coordinated pandemic containment with economic and social development, and went all out to ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and expectations, and to maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments, so as to create a favorable monetary and financial environment for securing a decisive victory in building a moderately prosperous society in all respects.I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Maintaining adequate liquidity at a reasonable level in the banking system. In 2020, the PBC closely monitored the liquidity supply and demand in the banking system and conducted open market operations in a more preemptive, precise, and timely manner. Besides long-term liquidity injections made through the use of instruments such as the cut in the required reserve ratio (RRR), central bank lending, central bank discounts, and the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), the PBC flexibly conducted open market operations, which were centered on the 7-day reverse repos, so as to maintain adequate liquidity at a reasonable level and to always strike a balance between liquidity supply and demand. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened market communications, improved the transparency of monetary policy, and effectively stabilized market expectations through various means, such as posting in advance the operation plan in the Announcement of Open Market Operations. In Q4, amid multiple seasonal and market factors affecting liquidity supply and demand, the PBC appropriately managed the intensity and pace of open market operations and responded to short-term truculence in a targeted manner. In late December, the PBC injected cross-year funds through 14-day reverse repo operations to meet market demand and maintain the stability of market liquidity at year-end. Guiding market rates to move around the central bank policy rates. In 2020, in response to the impact of COVID-19, the PBC preemptively guided the downward movement of policy rates, with both the MLF rate and the reverse repo rate falling by 30 bps, and cut the funding costs for private enterprises and micro and small-sized businesses (MSBs) through the transmission of the loan prime rate (LPR). In the second half of the year, both the MLF rate and the reverse repo rate remained unchanged, demonstrating a sound monetary policy stance. In the meanwhile, the PBC improved the continuity of open market operations, steadily sent short-term policy rate signals through daily operations, and guided short-term money market rates to move around the 7-day reverse repo operation rate on the open market within a reasonable range. The MLF rate, as the medium-term policy rate, has obvious guiding effects on medium and long-term market rates. In December, both interest rates on interbank CDs and yields on government bonds declined and converged toward the MLF rate. To judge the trend of short-term interest rates, we need to determine whether policy rates have changed in the first place, especially whether the 7-day reverse repo rate of the central bank’s open market operations has changed, and to avoid paying excessive attention to the number of open market operations. The number of open marketoperations is flexibly adjusted in accordance with temporary factors, such as public finance and cash as well as market demand. Its change does not fully reflect the trend in market rates, nor does the change represent a change in the central bank policy rate. Second, when observing market rates, we need to focus on the weighted average of DR007, which is the main indicator of market rates, and the average of DR007 over a period of time, rather than the transaction rate of an individual institution or the interest rate at a certain point of time, which may be disturbed by short-term factors.Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q4 2020, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent. In 2020, the PBC conducted CBS operations once in each month, totaling RMB61 billion. The CBS operations played a positive role in improving liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially small and medium-sized banks, and hence strengthened the capability of the financial sector to serve development of the real economy. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q4 2020, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totalingRMB35 billion. Specifically, the 1-year, 3-month, and 6-month bills registered RMB15 billion, RMB10 billion, and RMB10 billion, respectively. In 2020, the PBC issued in Hong Kong twelve batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills, totaling RMB155 billion. The regular issuance of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong not only enriched RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in the Hong Kong market but also drove both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market, thus promoting the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market. On January 27, 2021, Bank of China (Hong Kong) Limited launched a market-making mechanism for the RMB-denominated central bank bills repo business, fostering liquidity in the secondary market of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong. According to statistics, in 2020, offshore RMB bond issuances, other than the RMB-denominated central bank bills issued in Hong Kong, exceeded RMB130 billion, a year-on-year increase of 30 percent. Moreover, with the how and where to issue RMB bonds offshore increasingly diversified, the RMB offshore market saw more brisk transactions.II. Timely conducting Medium-term Lending Facility and Standing Lending Facility operations Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. An appropriate supply of medium- and long-term liquidity was ensured, giving full play to the signaling and guiding functions of the mid-term policy rate. In 2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB5.15 trillion of MLF operations, all with a maturity of one year. In particular, the amount of MLF operations posted RMB0.6 trillion, RMB0.4 trillion, RMB1.7 trillion, and RMB2.45 trillion in Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 respectively. At the end of the year, the outstanding MLF registered RMB5.15 trillion, RMB1.46 trillion more than that at the beginning of the year. The MLF operations were conducted by bidding, with the rate of February 17, 2020 posted 3.15 percent, down 10 basis points, and the rate of April 15, 2020 posted 2.95 percent, a further drop of 20 basis points. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner. The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was met in the full amount. In 2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB186.2 billion SLF operations, of which RMB102.7 billion, RMB48.7 billion, RMB6 billion, and RMB28.8 billion SLF operations were conducted in Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 respectively. At the end of the year, the balance of SLF operations registered RMB19.8 billion. The SLF played a role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, thus promoting the smooth operation of the money market. The rates for SLF operations were reduced by 30 basis points in Q2. After the cut, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates were 3.05 percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent respectively. III. Enhancing monetary and credit support to offset the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic To coordinate regular pandemic containment and economic and social development, the intensity, pace and focus of monetary policy adjustments were properly managed based on the different features at each stage. Policy measures were implemented in a more targeted and direct manner, with the aim of ensuring stability on six fronts and maintaining security in six areas. The efforts to provide financial support to stabilize businesses and secure employment have achieved the expected results. Macro policies were enhanced in a timely manner to offset the impact of thepandemic. In 2020, RMB1.7 trillion of short-term liquidity was provided to the financial market when it reopened after the Spring Festival holiday, which effectively stabilized market expectations. The three rounds of RRR cuts in 2020 released RMB1.75 trillion of long-term funds. By means of RRR cuts, MLF operations, and open market operations, liquidity was kept adequate at a reasonable level, thereby safeguarding the stable movement of market rates and creating a favorable liquidity environment for the issue of special central government and local government bonds. The policies of RMB1.8 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts were rolled out and put into place, with a multi-level and multi-tier approach. In 2020, the PBC rolled out RMB300 billion of special central bank lending, RMB500 billion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts, and RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts in three rounds, with a total amount of RMB1.8 trillion, in support of pandemic containment, the resumption of work and production, as well as the development of the real economy, including micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). By end-June 2020, the RMB300 billion quota of special central bank lending was used up, supporting relevant banks to issue a cumulative RMB283.4 billion of preferential loans to a total of 7,597 nationwide and local key enterprises, with a weighted average interest rate of 2.49 percent. The actual financing costs for enterprises dropped to 1.25 percent after a 50-percent fiscal subsidy on the loan interest. The special central bank lending policy vigorously eased the shortage of medical supplies at the beginning of the outbreak and fostered the normal supply of daily necessities in key areas during the pandemic. The RMB500 billion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts was used up, supporting locally incorporated banks to issue a cumulative RMB498.3 billion of preferential loans to around 590,000 enterprises, with a weighted average interest rate of 4.22 percent, which effectively addressed the pressing problems of debt repayment, turnover of capital, and expansion of financing in face of the resumption of work and production. In December 2020, the RMB1 trillion quota of inclusive central bank lending and central bank discounts was allocated, supporting locally incorporated banks to support around 1,580,000 enterprises, with a weighted average interest rate of 4.67 percent. These policies boosted a sense of gain in the real sector, accelerated the resumption of work and production, and improved the job market. With highlighted characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy were proactively promoted, with the aim of bolstering the development of MSMEs. By end 2020, the principal and interest repayments on loans of RMB7.3 trillion had beendeferred by banking financial institutions across the country. The instrument in support of deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans operated on a monthly basis, providing a cumulative RMB8.7 billion of incentive funds to locally incorporated banks and supporting deferral of the principal on a total of RMB873.7 billion inclusive MSB loans from June to December. The weighted average time extension registered 12.8 months, easing the temporary pressures on MSBs to repay the loan principal and interest. In 2020, a total of RMB3.9 trillion of inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs were provided by banking financial institutions, RMB1.6 trillion more than that in 2019. The support scheme for inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs operated on a quarterly basis, providing a cumulative RMB170 billion of preferential funding to locally incorporated banks and supporting a total of RMB480.8 billion in unsecured loans for MSBs from March to December, effectively alleviating the financing strains on MSBs. In line with the arrangements decided by the executive meeting of the State Council on extending the policies of deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans and the support scheme of inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs, on December 31, 2020, the PBC, jointly with the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC), Ministry of Finance (MOF), the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), issued the Notice on Extending the Policies of Deferred Repayments of Principal and Interest on Inclusive Loans for Micro and Small Businesses and the Support Scheme of Inclusive Unsecured Loans for Micro and Small Businesses (Yinfa No.324 [2020]), extending the two policies until March 31, 2021. First, the policy of deferred repayments of principal and interest on inclusive loans to MSBs was extended. Repayment of all the inclusive MSB loans eligible for this policy could be deferred based on market principles, and banks and enterprises could discuss the relevant terms. For inclusive MSB loans with a deferred repayment period of no less than 6 months that are issued by locally incorporated financial institutions, the PBC provides incentive funding of 1 percent of the loan principal. Second, the support scheme of inclusive unsecured MSB loans was extended. For inclusive unsecured MSB loans that are newly issued by eligible locally incorporated financial institutions, the PBC provides favorable funding for 40 percent of the loan principal. IV. Lowering the Required Reserve Ratio for financial institutions In 2020, the PBC launched three rounds of RRR cuts for financial institutions and lowered the interest rate on excess reserves in an attempt to support the economicrecovery. In January 2020, the PBC reduced the RRR for financial institutions (excluding finance companies, financial leasing companies, and auto finance companies) by 0.5 percentage points releasing over RMB800 billion of long-term funds. In March, the PBC implemented a targeted RRR cut for inclusive finance. For banks that met the criteria for loan issuances for inclusive finance in 2019, the PBC granted a preferential RRR cut of 0.5 or 1.5 percentage points. Moreover, joint-stock commercial banks that received a 0.5-percentage-point RRR cut according to this assessment would enjoy an additional RRR cut of 1 percentage point. These two measures released about RMB550 billion of long-term funds in total, and guided financial institutions to expand loan issuances for inclusive finance. In April, the PBC announced a RRR cut of 1 percentage point for rural commercial banks, rural cooperative banks, rural credit cooperatives, village banks, and city commercial banks operating solely within their provincial-level administrative regions. The measure was implemented in two phases, under which cuts were carried out on April 15 and May 15 respectively. About RMB400 billion of long-term funds were freed up by the cuts. Meanwhile, the interest rate on excess reserves deposited in the central bank by financial institutions was lowered from 0.72 percent to 0.35 percent. All the above-mentioned measures contributed to broadening long-term and stable funding sources for financial institutions, improving their efficiency in the use of funds, and boosting their credit support for MSMEs as well as for industries and firms that were seriously hit by the pandemic. V. Further improving the macro-prudential policy framework The mechanism of a countercyclical capital buffer was established. In September 2020, the PBC and CBIRC jointly issued the Notice on Establishing the Mechanism of Countercyclical Capital Buffer (Yinfa No. 233 [2020]), stipulating the establishment of the mechanism of countercyclical capital buffer and setting the initial countercyclical capital buffer ratio at zero. The mechanism will contribute to the sound business operation of banking institutions and safeguard the stability of China’s financial system. A regulatory framework for financial holding companies (FHCs) was preliminarily set up. In September 2020, the PBC released the Trial Measures on the Regulation of Financial Holding Companies (Order No. 4 [2020] of the People’s Bank of China), which entered into effect from November 2020. The Measures specify law-based market access for FHCs that are invested in and controlled by non-financial companies. The capital, behavior, and risk of FHCs shall beregulated in an all-round, continuous, and look-through manner, so as to effectively isolate the FHCs’ real economic activities from their financial activities and to prevent cross-organization, cross-industry, or cross-market risk contagion. The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was improved. On December 3, 2020, the PBC and the CBIRC jointly released the Measures for Assessment of Systemically Important Banks (SIBs) (Yinfa No. 289 [2020]). The Measures specify the indicators, procedures, and work division in the assessment of SIBs in China, and they establish the basis for SIB identification. A management system for real estate loan concentration for banking institutions was established. In December 2020, the PBC, jointly with CBIRC, issued the Notice on Establishing a Management System for Real Estate Loan Concentration for Banking Institutions (Yinfa No.322 [2020]), which set up a management system for real estate loan concentration and specified the ceiling proportions of real estate loans and personal housing loans in the total loans of banking institutions. The system will contribute to strengthening the resilience and soundness of the financial system, promoting steady and healthy development of the real estate market, enhancing the banking institutions’ internal constraints, improving the credit structure, and fostering balanced development of the financial sector, the real estate sector, and the real economy. The role of the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. Since the beginning of 2020, in line with the requirements for key tasks set at the Central Economic Work Conference, the PBC further improved the MPA, optimized the credit structure, and reduced financing costs. First, the weight of financing to MSBs and private enterprises as well as the manufacturing sector was increased in bank assessments, and “use of central bank lending” was introduced as a temporary assessment indicator. These measures guided financial institutions to enhance their support for the key areas and weak links in the national economy and secured incremental financing flows to the manufacturing sector and MSMEs. Second, the PBC improved the assessment of the use of the LPR, released the potential of LPR reform in reducing loan interest rates, encouraged banks to accelerate the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans, and pushed ahead with a marked decline in the overall financing costs for enterprises.The macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing was adjusted. On March 11, 2020, the PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) released the Notice on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Parameter for Cross-border Financing (Yinfa No. 64 [2020]), increasing the parameter from 1 to 1.25. In order to improve the macro-prudential management of overall cross-border financing and to guide financial institutions to adjust their asset and liability structure of foreign exchange in a market-based manner, the PBC and the SAFE decided to lower the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for financial institutions’ cross-border financing to 1 from 1.25 on December 11, 2020. In addition, the PBC and the SAFE released the Notice on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Parameter for Cross-border Financing (Yinfa No. 5 [2021]), lowering the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing of enterprises to 1 from 1.25 on January 7, 2021. The foreign exchange risk reserve ratio was adjusted when appropriate. Since the beginning of 2020, the RMB exchange rate experienced two-way floating based on market supply and demand amid strengthened flexibility, stable market expectations, orderly cross-border capital flows, stable performance in the foreign exchange market, and balanced market demand and supply. As a result, the PBC decided to reduce the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from 20 percent to zero, effective from October 12, 2020. VI. Actively leveraging the role of structural monetary policy instruments The PBC actively used central bank lending to support rural development, central bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other tools to guide financial institutions to step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural people as well as poverty alleviation. Good use was made of central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects to increase credit supply to the “three autonomous regions”, i.e., Tibet, the four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, the areas in four provinces with large Tibetan populations, and the “three autonomous prefectures”, i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, to lower the financing costs in these areas as well as to achieve targeted poverty alleviation. In the four quarters of 2020, central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects was issued in the amounts of RMB6.3 billion, RMB8.0 billion, RMB7.2 billion, and RMB7.9 billion, respectively, with the balance recording RMB37.0 billion at end-2020. At end-2020, outstanding centralbank lending to support rural development registered RMB457.2 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB975.6 billion and RMB215.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB578.4 billion. In 2020, the PBC made a net withdrawal of PSLs in the amount of RMB302.3 billion from policy and development banks, with the net withdrawal in Q4 totaling RMB199.3 billion and the outstanding PSL registering RMB3.2350 trillion at end-2020. Targeted Medium-term Lending Facility (TMLF) operations were conducted. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions to expand their credit supply to MSBs and private firms with preferential interest rates. In the first quarter of 2020, the PBC conducted one-year TMLF operations totaling RMB240.5 billion, with a rate of 3.15 percent. In the second quarter, the PBC conducted one-year TMLF operations totaling RMB56.1 billion, with a rate of 2.95 percent. The TMLFs maturing in Q3 were rolled over in the form of MLFs. In the fourth quarter, the PBC did not conduct any TMLF operations. At end-2020, the outstanding TMLFs totaled RMB296.6 billion. Box 2 Boosting Green Finance to Reach a Carbon Emissions Peak and Achieve Carbon Neutrality In 2020, General Secretary Xi Jinping announced at the General Debate of the 75th Session of the United Nations General Assembly that China would strive to reach a carbon emissions peak by 2030 and to achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. It was required at the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference that efforts should be made to accelerate green and low-carbon development and to make good progress in reaching a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality. Centering around the objectives of peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality, the PBC will deliver a sound overarching design and plan for green finance, give play to the three functions of finance to support green development, and gradually improve the five pillars of the green finance system. I. Bringing into play the three major functions of finance to support green development Green finance refers to economic activities aimed at supporting improvements in the environment, mitigating climate change, and high-efficiency utilization of resources. It means providing financial services for the funding and investment, project operation, and risk management of programs concerning environmental protection,energy conservation, clean energy, green transport, and green building. Centering around the goals of a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality, work should be done to further focus on carbon emissions reductions, to give full play to the role of resource allocations, and to manage well the risks related to climate change in the process of developing green finance. In addition, efforts should be made to promote carbon price discovery under the constraints of carbon neutrality and to guide the financial system to allocate more resources to green and low-carbon areas. First, full play should be given to resource allocations. Currently, fossil fuels account for a large share of the total energy consumption in China. With the aim of achieving a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality, the proportion of fossil fuel against total energy consumption needs to gradually decline. Therefore, great efforts must be made to promote the development of renewable resources, such as wind and solar power, and to conserve energy and reduce carbon emissions in the areas of electricity, industry, architecture, and transportation. Meanwhile, development of technologies such as carbon capture and storage should be further supported. In order to promote the development of green finance to focus on green and low-carbon areas, a variety of policy measures, such as monetary policies, credit policies, regulatory policies, compulsory disclosures, green evaluations, self-regulation, and product innovations should be adopted so as to guide and allocate more financial resources to green innovation projects in terms of clean energy, green transformation, and carbon capture and storage. Second, there should be proper management of risks related to climate change. In the future, constraints on carbon emissions will be strengthened notably, incurring risks to the transformation of the high-carbon industries. The frequent occurrence of natural disasters caused by climate change will also have an impact on various fields. Various means such as pressure tests on climate risks and environmental and climate risk analyses should be adopted to enhance the financial system’s capability to manage the risks related to transformation and climate change. Third, carbon price discovery will be promoted under the constraint of carbon neutrality. Centering around the objective of carbon neutrality, it is necessary to set carbon emissions quotas with strong binding force. Construction of a national carbon emissions trading market will be promoted, along with related financial product and trading mechanism designs so as to promote market discovery of a reasonable carbon price under the carbon emissions constraints. II. Gradually improving the five major pillars of a green finance system To give play to the three major functions of finance in support of green development, the five major pillars of a green finance system should be gradually improved. First, continue building a standard system for green finance. China is already taking the lead in terms of setting the standards for green finance, but these standards have yet to be gradually unified domestically as well as to be compatible with international practices. We can start with trials of national standards and industrial standards for green finance so as to promote regulated development of green finance and to accumulate valuable experience for promoting nationwide green finance standards that is feasible for banks and beneficial to enterprises. Second, improve supervision of financial institutions and the requirements for information disclosure. Gradually establish a system of climate and environmental information disclosures for financial institutions and guide more investment toward environment friendly enterprises, such as those that are green and low-carbon. Third, establish a policy incentive and constraint mechanism. Performance evaluations of green finance should be periodically conducted for financial institutions. The feasibility of setting differentiated risk weights for green and brown assets should be studied. The PBC will comprehensively adopt a variety of monetary policy tools to guide financial institutions to step up credit support to the green and low-carbon sectors. Fourth, continuously improve green financial products and the relevant market system. As of end-Q3 2020, outstanding green loans denominated in RMB and foreign currencies in China posted over RMB11 trillion, ranking first in the world. Full play will be given to the market mechanism. By means of innovating products and tools, enhancing pricing rationality, and strengthening environmental risk management, the PBC will continue to encourage products including green credit, green bonds, and green funds, build a carbon trading market, and develop carbon futures. Fifth, strengthen international cooperation on green finance. Continue to deepen international cooperation in green finance under multilateral frameworks, such as the G20, the Central Banks, and the Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), and the “Belt and Road”, as well as under bilateral frameworksbetween China and Europe, China and the United Kingdom, China and France, etc. Going forward, the PBC will follow the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, focus on the three major functions and five pillars of green financial development, and improve the policy framework and the incentive and constraint mechanisms for green finance. It will utilize structural monetary policy instruments and guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development in accordance with market-oriented principles so as to achieve the objectives of peak carbon and carbon neutrality. VII. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reform Oriented by high-quality development, the PBC guided financial institutions to continuously step up support to key areas and weak links in the national economy, enhanced financial support for market entities impacted by COVID-19, and focused on keeping businesses and employment stable. It also provided powerful support to achieve the goal of winning the battle against poverty and to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. Emphasis was placed on providing financial support to keep businesses and employment stable. Financial services were continuously improved, promoting MSB financing featuring “increased volume, lowered price and expanding coverage”. The PBC enhanced support for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector to promote its high-quality development. The PBC implemented the policy of deferred repayments for inclusive loans to MSBs, and provided support for unsecured inclusive loans to MSBs, and work was done to ensure the continuation and reasonable adjustment of policy so as to invigorate market entities and stabilize market expectations. By focusing on key groups and key businesses, the PBC conducted a variety of innovative activities connecting government agencies, banks, and businesses to enable more effective and better-matched financing. No efforts were spared in providing targeted financial support for completing the task of poverty alleviation. The PBC focused on the deeply impoverished regions and the counties listed for supervision of poverty relief. Financial support was enhanced for industrial development used as a means of poverty alleviation and for relocation of impoverished residents. The quality of basic financial services in thepoverty-stricken areas was improved, with all the impoverished counties lifted out of poverty. In addition, the PBC promoted the improvement of corresponding regulatory mechanisms for financing poverty alleviation, concentrated on preventing and resolving relevant risks, and cooperated with the census on poverty elimination, thereby facilitating high-quality and sustainable poverty alleviation. More resources were allocated to support the rural revitalization strategy. The PBC arranged special quotas of central bank lending to support rural development and supported bank issuance of more loans to expand pig farming. Financial services were improved for spring plough and farming preparations, and for agricultural investment. Work was done to optimize financial services for reform of the rural property rights system, to develop the collective economy, and to promote the collateralization of operational rights of contracted farmland. VIII. Further deepening the market-based interest rate reform Since the beginning of 2020, the PBC has smoothed the transmission of monetary policy by means of reforms. With continued progress in the LPR reform, the financing costs of enterprises have witnessed an obvious decline. First, taking a forward-looking view, the PBC guided the open market operation (OMO) rates and the MLF rates to move downward by 30 basis points, driving down the one-year LPR by 30 basis points. Accordingly, the overall market rates and loan rates went downward, supporting the reasonable growth of loan demand. In December, the weighted average rate on corporate loans posted 4.61 percent, down by 0.51 percentage points from the previous December and hitting a record low for two consecutive months. Second, use of the LPR was further promoted. Starting from January 1, 2020, newly-issued loans no longer took the benchmark loan rates as their pricing reference. During the period from March to August 2020, the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans was completed in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. As of end-August, 92.4 percent of outstanding loans had completed the shift in the pricing benchmark. Banks were urged to incorporate the LPR into the funds transfer pricing (FTP) of loans, fundamentally removing the implicit floor of loan rates. Accordingly, more financial resources were guided to be allocated to MSBs and private enterprises, and the actual loan rates declined. Third, the market-oriented reform of credit-card overdraft interest rates was promoted. The credit-card overdraft interest rates were determined by negotiations between credit-card issuers and cardholders from January 1, 2020, with the caps and floors removed. Administrative controls on credit-card overdraft interestrates were lifted and market-oriented pricing was completely achieved, which was conducive to promoting market competition and urging card issuers to improve services. Fourth, the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rates was strengthened, promoting explicit indications of annualized loan rates. Special membership was set up and micro-credit companies were included into the scope of interest rate self-regulation so as to improve the self-regulatory mechanism for market-rate pricing. Fifth, the benchmark deposit interest rates continued to play their role as the “ballast” for the overall interest rate system in China. Efforts were made to strengthen the self-regulation of deposit interest rates, to reduce irregular innovative deposit products, and to maintain competitive order in the deposit market. The LPR reform promoted optimization of the financial structure, smoothed the internal pricing mechanism of banks, and effectively promoted the market-based reform of deposit rates, as indicated by the overall decline of deposit rates. IX. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate regime and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of the exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In 2020, the highest and lowest CNY central parities were 6.5236 and 7.1316, respectively, against the USD. During the 243 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 140 days and depreciated on 103 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 1.00 percent (670 bps) and 0.76 percent (530 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rates against other major international currencies floated in two ways. At end-2020, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the pound. and the Japanese yen had appreciated 6.92 percent, 2.92 percent, and 1.34 percent, respectively, from end-2019, while the RMB central parity had depreciated 2.61 percent against the euro during the same period of time. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism commenced in 2005, the RMB had appreciated by a cumulative total of 26.84 percent, 24.79 percent, and 15.53 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen through end-December, 2020. Direct RMB trading was buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stableliquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and to facilitate bilateral trade and investment.As of end-December, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB50.032 billion, and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD516 million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.X. Promoting the resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner and deepening the reform of financial institutions Resolution of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions was carried out smoothly. The PBC strove to ease the impact of the pandemic and achieved crucial progress and important initial results in the resolution of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions. The reform and restructuring plans of key financial institutions, including Hengfeng Bank and Jinzhou Bank, were carried out smoothly to ensure the sound operation of the financial system during the critical and sensitive period and to firmly safeguard the bottom line that no systemic risks should occur. Risk resolution of Baoshang Bank (BSB) was advanced steadily and orderly. The reform and restructuring of BSB has been progressing smoothly, and Mengshang Bank and Huishang Bank, which have entered into the purchase and assumption process with BSB, are abundant in capital and operating smoothly. As BSB has become seriously insolvent and has failed to repay debts that came due, the takeover group filed a bankruptcy petition with the CBIRC in the name of the troubled bank and the regulator has approved the bank’s application to enter into bankruptcy procedures. On November 23, 2020, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court ruled to accept the bankruptcy and liquidation petition of BSB, and it appointed the BSB liquidation group as the administrator. Up to now, the work on BSB bankruptcy and liquidation has been progressing steadily and orderly. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC advanced the reform plans for development and policy financial institutions across the board to redefine their responsibilities and the scope of their business, improve corporate governance, strengthen the constraint and incentive mechanism, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development, thus better serving the national development strategies. XI. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Two-way opening-up of the financial market was pushed forward. First, the pilot quota of Qualified Domestic Limited Partner (QDLP) and Qualified Domestic Investment Enterprise (QDIE) was increased to USD10 billion in Shanghai, Beijing.and Shenzhen. Second, Hainan Free Trade Port and the city of Chongqing were added to the QDLP pilot program, with a quota of USD5 billion in each area. Facilitation of receipts and payments for trade was boosted. First, the pilot program for facilitating foreign exchange receipts and payments for trade was expanded to cover more areas in a steady and orderly manner. Second, outbound foreign exchange payments under trade in services became more convenient. On November 1, 2020, online verification services for tax registration of foreign exchange payments under trade in services were launched for trial operation nationwide. Third, to facilitate individuals’ foreign exchange business under the initiative of “going global”. The pilot program was expanded for online processing of foreign exchange sales and purchases for overseas studies which are not part of the annual quota for foreign exchange purchases by individuals. Fourth, to improve the environment for foreign exchange business after “bringing in”. The pilot programs for facilitating small-value consumption by foreign individuals and for facilitating foreign exchange purchases and payments for the income of foreign top-level talents in China were promoted. Administration of the foreign exchange market was strengthened. With regular pandemic containment measures remaining in place, efforts were made to coordinate pandemic containment with financial risk prevention and mitigation. Monitoring and analysis of potential risks incurred in cross-border fund flows were strengthened. Emphasis was placed on cracking down on illegal financial activities, such as underground banks, cross-border gambling, and illegal online foreign exchange trading so as to ensure stability on six fronts and to maintain security in six areas. In 2020, a total of 2,440 cases violating the laws and regulations of the foreign exchange administration were handled, with total fines amounting to RMB940 million. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In 2020, the financial market operated smoothly. Market interest rates were basically stable. The volume of bond issuances and cash bond transactions expanded. The stock market index picked up and witnessed year-on-year rises in both turnover and the size of funds raised.I. Financial market overview 1. Money market transactions were active with stable interest rates Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level, and money market interest rates were stable. In December 2020, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending and pledged repos posted 1.3 percent and 1.36 percent, respectively, down 79 basis points and 74 basis points, respectively, from December 2019. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond repos among depository institutions posted 1.14 percent, 22 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. At end-2020, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 1.09 percent and 2.38 percent, respectively, down 60 and 36 basis points from end-2019, respectively. The market saw active repo transactions and interbank lending. In 2020, the volume of trading of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB959.8 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.9 trillion and a year-on-year increase of 17.6 percent. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB147.1 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB590.9 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 2.6 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos and overnight lending accounted for 84.7 percent and 90.2 percent, respectively, of the total turnover in bond repos and interbank lending, decreasing 0.5 percentage points and 1.2 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 20.3 percent year on year to RMB287.3 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses operated steadily. In 2020, around 29,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB19.0 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB167.3 trillion. At end-2020, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB11.2 trillion. Around 52,000 negotiable CDs was issued by financial institutions in 2020, raising RMB9.7 trillion, a decrease of RMB2.3 trillion year on year. In 2020, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.60 percent, 20 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. Interest rate swap transactions witnessed steady growth. In 2020, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 274,000 transactions, increasing 15.3 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB19.6 trillion, an increase of 7.8 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB12. 5 trillion, accounting for 63.8 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 82.7 percent and 14.9 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In 2020, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 1,718 transactions, with RMB266.5 billion of the notional principal.The loan prime rate (LPR) interest rate option business developed steadily. After the LPR interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market on March 23, 2020, it has attracted participation by a variety of market players, covering large commercial banks, joint-stock commercial banks, city commercial banks, rural commercial banks, foreign-funded banks, securities companies, and so forth. At end-2020, a total of 484 interest rate option transactions were concluded, adding up to RMB90.75 billion. Specifically, 126 LPR interest rate swap transactions were concluded, amounting to RMB14.35 billion of the notional principal, and 358 were LPR interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB76.4 billion of the notional principal. 2. Bond financing costs decreased on the whole, and transactions and issuances of cash bonds expanded Bond market yields went down first and then picked up, with credit spreads widening. Government securities yields decreased continuously from January to April 2020, and have rebounded since then. At end-2020, the yields on 1-year and 10-year government securities increased by 11 basis points and 1 basis point, respectively, from end-2019. Credit spreads on 3-year AAA and AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills expanded by 3 basis points and 52 basis points year on year, respectively.The costs of financing through the issuance of bonds decreased. In 2020, the average coupon rate of 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.93 percent, 24 basis points lower than the rate in 2019. The average coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by China Development Bank was 3.31 percent, 26 basis points lower than the rate in 2019. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated non-financial enterprises was 2.82 percent, 58 basis points lower than the rate in 2019. The volume of cash bond transactions on the interbank market maintained growth and that on the stock exchanges witnessed a significant increase. In 2020, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB253 trillion, registering an increase of 16.5 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of bond trading on the interbank market was RMB232.8 trillion, representing an increase of 11.5 percent year on year. The value of bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB20.2 trillion, an increase of 141.6 percent year on year. The value of bond lending transactions stood at RMB7.5 trillion, an increase of 61.6 percent year on year. Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In 2020, the value of bond issuances increased by 26 percent, or RMB11.7 trillion, year on year to RMB56.9 trillion, with government bonds, financial bonds, and corporate debenture bonds increasing by RMB5 trillion, RMB3.2 trillion, and RMB3.5 trillion, respectively. At end-2020, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB116.7 trillion, an increase of 17.9 percent year on year.3. Bill financing grew continuously The bill acceptance business grew continuously. In 2020, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB22.1 trillion, rising 8.4 percent year on year. At end-2020, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.1 trillion, increasing 10.7 percent year on year. In 2020, outstanding commercial draft acceptances rose by RMB1.4 trillion,and 70.3 percent of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing expanded continuously. In 2020, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB40.4 trillion, growing 17.7 percent year on year. At end-2020, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.4 trillion, up 9.7 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.8 percent of the total outstanding loans, 0.1 percentage points lower year on year. 4. Stock indices soared, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing significantly year on year Stock indices soared. At end-2020, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,473 points, increasing 13.9 percent from end-2019. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 14,471 points, increasing 38.7 percent from end-2019. Turnover on the stock markets expanded significantly. In 2020, the combined turnover of the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB206.8 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB851.1 billion, an increase of 63 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets surged year on year. In 2020, a cumulative RMB1.2 trillion was raised, increasing 68.6 percent year on year. 5. Growth of premium income slowed down, while growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In 2020, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB4.5 trillion, up 6.1 percent year on year, a deceleration of 6.1 percentage points from 2019. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB1.4 trillion, representing a year-on-year increase of 7.9 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claim and benefit payments increased 7 percent year on year, and total life insurance claim and benefit payments went up by 8.8 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-2020, total assets in the insurance sector increased 13.3 percent year on year to RMB23.3 trillion, an acceleration of 1.1 percentage points from end-2019. Specifically, bank deposits and investment-linked assets increased by 3 percent and 19.2 percent, respectively, year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions rose slightly year on year In 2020, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD8.4 trillion, an increase of 5.6 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD16.3 trillion, a decrease of 0.2 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD9.5 trillion, accounting for 57.9 percent of the total swap turnover. Turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD104.4 billion, rising 37.4 percent year on year. Turnover in foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD810.9 billion, rising 70.5 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 57.2 percent of the total market share. Participants on the foreign exchange market expanded continuously. At end-2020, there were 735 members on the foreign exchange spot market, 266 members on the foreign exchange forward market, 259 members on the foreign exchange swap market, 213 members on the currency swap market, and 163 members on the foreign exchange options market. There were 30 market makers on the spot market and 27 market makers on the forward and swap markets. 7. The gold market operated steadily with an overall rise in pricesGold prices experienced a choppy rise. At end-2020, Loco London closed at USD1,897.5 per ounce, representing a gain of 25.07 percent from end-2019. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB390.0 per gram, increasing 14.44 percent from end-2019. In 2020, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 58,700 tons, representing a decrease of 14.44 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB22.55 trillion, increasing 4.91 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond and bill market The legal system of the bond market was improved. In February 2020, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), Ministry of Finance (MOF), People’s Bank of China (PBC), and China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) jointly released an announcement allowing qualified pilot commercial banks and insurers with proper investment management capacity to participate in the trading of treasury bond futures at the China Financial Futures Exchange in line with the principles of law compliance, manageable risks, and sustainable business development. In June 2020, the PBC, together with the relevant departments, released the Notice of the PBC, NDRC, and CSRC on Issues Concerning Disposal of Defaults on Corporate Debenture Bonds (Yinfa No.144 [2020]), which improved the risk prevention and disposal mechanism of defaults on corporate debenture bonds. In the meantime, the PBC promoted release of the Minutes of the Symposium on Courts’ Hearings of Bond-Related Dispute Cases by the Supreme People’s Court so as to consolidate legal safeguards. In July 2020, the PBC and relevant departments jointly released the Rules for Recognition of Standard Debt-Based Assets (Announcement No.5 [2020] of the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC and SAFE), which specified the boundaries, identification criteria, and regulatory arrangements for standard debt-based assets and non-standard debt-based assets so as to guide well-regulated market development. In December 2020, the PBC released Announcement No.21 [2020] of the PBC, for the purpose of strengthening interim and ex-post management of market makers for spot bond trading in the interbank market following the cancellation of administrative approvals. In December 2020, the PBC, together with the relevant departments, released the Administrative Measures for Information Disclosures of Corporate Debenture Bonds (Announcement No.22 [2020] of the PBC, NDRC and CSRC), which unified the standards for information disclosures of corporate debenture bonds. In December 2020, the Standing Committee of the 13th National People’s Congress deliberated and approved Amendment (XI) to the Criminal Law, which greatly increased penalties for crimes such as fraudulent issuances, fabricated information disclosures, false certificates provided by intermediaries, and so on, in an attempt toprovide a solid legal safeguard for the high-quality development of the bond market. In June 2020, the PBC released the Administrative Measures on Standardized Bills (Announcement No.6 [2020] of the PBC). Standardized bills connect the bill market with the bond market and enable the professional pricing and investing capacity of the bond market to be fully leveraged in a way that improves the standardization of bill transactions and enhances the financing function of bills. In December, the PBC released Announcement No.19 [2020] of the PBC, which specifies, in terms of commercial acceptance drafts, the requirements for information indicated on the drafts and the disclosure of credit information of acceptors so as to improve market-based constraint mechanisms and safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of holders. 2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures industry Significant progress was secured in the capital market reform. On a national scale, the CSRC removed foreign ownership limits in futures companies from January 1, 2020 and those in securities companies and fund management companies from April 1, 2020. In July 2020, the first group of enterprises went public on the newly established National Equities Exchange and Quotations Select (NEEQ Select), achieving critical headway in building a multi-layer capital market. In August 2020, the reform of ChiNext market was officially launched with the pilot registration-based system in place, which was an important achievement in the reform of the registration-based IPO system. The legal system in the capital market was further improved. The new Securities Law was implemented as of March 1, 2020, which provided a solid legal guarantee for preventing and controlling market risks, safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of investors, and forging a well-regulated, transparent, open, vigorous, and resilient capital market. In July 2020, the Supreme People’s Court released the Provisions on Several Issues Concerning Representative Actions Arising from Securities Disputes, marking the official launch of China’s class action system in securities disputes. Capital market building was stepped up. In October 2020, the State Council released the Opinions on Further Improving the Quality of Listed Companies, for the purposes of improving the quality of listed companies in six respects, including advancedcorporate governance and strengthened corporate growth. In November 2020, the Central Committee for Deepening Overall Reform deliberated and approved the Implementation Plan for Improving the Delisting Mechanism of Listed Companies, aiming to improve the delisting mechanism and enhance the delisting intensity for listed companies through six means, including improving delisting standards and streamlining delisting procedures. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The development of commercial insurance in the social service sector was bolstered. In January 2020, the CBIRC, together with 12 other ministries and commissions, issued the Opinions on Promoting the Development of Commercial Insurance in the Field of Social Services, which introduced 11 policies and measures in five respects to help commercial insurance play a better role in the social service sector. The property insurance industry was propelled to shift toward high-quality development. In July 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Issuing the Three-Year Action Plan (2020–2022) for Promoting High-Quality Development of the Property Insurance Industry and put forward elaborate planning, including such aspects as the transformation and development of the industry, the capability to serve the national economy, society, and people’s livelihood, the level of opening-up and international influence as well as regulatory policies, systems, and mechanisms. The development of personal insurance was promoted, featuring wider coverage, improved quality, and steady growth. In December 2020, measures were rolled out at the executive meeting of the State Council to promote personal insurance development featuring wider coverage, improved quality, and steady growth. The measures include accelerating the development of commercial health insurance, incorporating commercial pension insurance into old-age pension services as the third pillar and speeding up its construction, and enhancing the long-term investment capacity of insurance funds. 4. Enhancing coordinated supervision of the financial infrastructure In March 2020, after being deliberated and passed at the tenth meeting of the Central Committee for Deepening Overall Reform, the Work Plan on Coordinating Supervision over the Financial Infrastructures (Yinfa No.54 [2020]) was co-issued by the PBC, NDRC, MOF, CBIRC, CSRC, and State Administration of ForeignExchange (SAFE). The work plan aimed to further improve the coordinated supervision and construction planning of the financial infrastructure in China and to enhance the capability of serving the real economy and forestalling financial risks. In July 2020, the PBC and CSRC jointly issued Announcement No. 7 [2020] of the PBC and CSRC and approved interconnectivity cooperation between relevant infrastructure institutions in the interbank bond market and the exchange-traded bond market. The PBC and CSRC will strengthen regulatory cooperation and coordination to boost the free flow of factors in the bond market. 5. Promoting the high-level opening-up of the financial market In March 2020, under the guidance of the PBC, relevant financial infrastructures improved their transaction settlement arrangements and launched services such as rolling settlement and flexible settlement intervals, which met the diversified needs of overseas institutional investors and further facilitated their operations. In September 2020, the PBC, CSRC and SAFE jointly drafted the Announcement on Issues Concerning Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Exposure Draft), which clarifies the overall institutional arrangements for the opening-up of China’s bond market and solicits market opinions on the arrangements facilitating overseas institutional investors to allocate RMB bond assets. In September 2020, FTSE Russell announced that it would add China government bonds to its World Government Bond Index (WGBI) in October 2021. So far, all of the three global major bond index providers have included or are planning to include China’s bonds in their relevant indexes, which fully reflects international investors’ confidence in the long-term sound development of China’s economy and further opening-up of China’s financial sector. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments In 2020, impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the global economy has experienced the most severe recession since World War II. The advanced economies have implemented ultra-loose monetary policies and large-scale fiscal stimulus plans, and the economies recovered in the second half of the year. Meanwhile, the pandemic has caused the rise of fiscal sustainability risks and financial risks that deeply influenced the global economic structure, international trade and investment, and may lead to a long-lasting scarring effect. 1. Economic and financial market performance in the major economies The global economy has experienced a slow recovery. In 2020, the major advanced economies went through a GDP drop in Q2, a GDP rise in Q3, and a recovery divergence in Q4. In Japan, the year-on-year GDP growth rate in Q3 was -5.7 percent, with the drop declining by 4.6 percent from Q2. The US posted a 2.5 percent year-on-year GDP decrease in Q4, with the drop declining by 6.6 and 0.4 percentage points from Q2 and Q3 respectively, while the annual year-on-year GDP decrease was 3.5 percent. The euro area posted a 5.1 percent year-on-year GDP decrease in Q4, with the drop declining by 9.6 percentage points from Q2 but expanding slightly by 0.8 percentage points from Q3, while the annual year-on-year GDP decrease was 6.8 percent. The global pandemic has worsened since December 2020, with nearly 20 million new confirmed COVID-19 global cases in a single month and over 100 million cumulative confirmed COVID-19 global cases. Numerous countries enhanced their pandemic control measures, and the economic recovery slowed down. The US Consumer Confidence Index dropped from its peak of 49.8 in November to 44.6 in December, while the services PMI in the euro area and the U.K. dropped below 50 since September and November, respectively. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) posted a decrease in their latest global growth forecasts for 2020 by 3.5, 4.3, and 4.2 percent, while bouncing back by 5.5, 4.0, and 4.2 percent for 2021, respectively, with the global economy basically not recovering to its pre-pandemic level until Q4 of 2021. The labor market has deteriorated. The US unemployment rate reached its peak of 14.8 percent in April 2020 and has gradually decreased ever since, while the drop continued to decline, with the December unemployment rate remaining unchanged at 6.7 percent from November. From April to November 2020, the euro area unemployment rate increased from 7.2 percent to 8.3 percent, while the U.K. unemployment rate increased from 4.0 percent to 5.0 percent. The deterioration of labor market conditions not only reflected the increase in the unemployment rate but also the decline in working hours. The International Labor Organization estimated that global working hours in Q3 2020 decreased by 12.1 percent from Q4 2019, which equals a loss of 345 million full-time jobs. Inflation generally went down, with a divergence across the economies. The major advanced economies have continued with a low level of inflation. In December 2020, the year-on-year growth rate of the CPI posted 1.4 and 0.6 percent for the US andU.K., respectively, while the year-on-year growth rate of the HICP in the euro area and the CPI for Japan posted -0.3 and -1.2 percent. Some of the emerging market economies experienced a deflation. Thailand and Malaysia continued to have a negative CPI growth rate since March 2020, with a year-on-year growth rate of -0.3 and -1.4 percent, respectively. Meanwhile, India, Brazil, and other economies have to some extent faced some structural inflationary pressures, with a 4.6 percent year-on-year growth rate of the CPI for India and a 4.5 year-on-year growth rate of the IPCA for Brazil in December. International trade and investment declined significantly. The WTO forecast that the volume of world merchandise trade would record a 9.2 percent year-on-year decline in 2020, followed by a potential 7.2 percent rebound in 2021, while the trade volume might still be significantly lower than the level in 2019. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) stated that global foreign direct investment experienced a 42 percent year-on-year decrease, and growth would continue to be weak in 2021.There were heightened potential risks in the financial markets. In March 2020, financial markets in the major advanced economies fell into a panic, reflected by a sell-off in risky assets and some traditional safe haven assets, and circuit-breakers in the stock markets of multiple countries amid a liquidity contraction of the US dollar, as well as currency depreciations and large capital outflows in the emerging economies. Since April, as the major economies adopted large-scale stimulus plans, market sentiment tended to calm down, and the financial markets were significantly restored. The liquidity of the US dollar converted from a shortage to abundance, with the USD index declining from 102 in March to 90 at the end of December. At the end of 2020, the one-year London interbank market USD-Libor was 0.34 percent, 166 bps lower than that at the end of last year, while the one-year euro-area interbank market Euribor was -0.50 percent, 25 bps lower than that at the end of last year. Against the background of a weak recovery of the real economy, global stock markets rebounded strongly, with a new high for the three major US stock market indexes in December 2020, which was detached from economic fundamentals with heightened potential risks. 2. Monetary policies of the major economies Implementing ultra-loose monetary policies. First, policy rates were swiftly lowered. In March 2020, over 40 central banks across the globe lowered their interest rates more than 50 times in total, while the US Fed, the Bank of England (BOE), and the Bank of Canada (BOC) set their policy rates close to zero. Second, the scale ofmonetary policy operations was expanded. The US Fed, the BOC, and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) increased the scale and duration of their repurchase agreements. The European Central Bank (ECB) increased the volume and decreased the price of its targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III). Third, asset purchase plans were resumed or enhanced. The US Fed and the BOJ committed unlimited treasury purchases, while the ECB expanded its asset purchase program (APP) and set up a new pandemic emergency purchase program (PEPP). The central banks in Australia, Canada, India, South Korea, and other countries also launched bond purchase plans. Providing targeted support through liquidity facilities. The US Fed resumed and upgraded the rescue facilities it had used during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis to relieve the pressure on financial markets. It also established the paycheck protection program liquidity facility (PPPLF) and multiple structural facilities to engage in rescuing enterprises, individuals, and other market entities. The ECB introduced long-term COVID-19 pandemic emergency refinancing operations. Assessing and adjusting monetary policy frameworks. In 2020, the central banks of some advanced economies in succession conducted assessments of their monetary policy frameworks. In August, after completing its latest assessment, the US Fed declared it would revise its monetary policy framework aiming to achieve an inflation rate that averages 2 percent. It stated that its monetary policy response to real employment would depend on the shortfalls, instead of the deviations, from the maximum employment level, and it emphasized that employment judgments would be based on multiple dimensions. The ECB and the BOC are expected to complete their assessments of their monetary policy frameworks in 2021. Box 3 The Spillover Effect of Monetary Policies in the Major Economies Central banks in the major economies, including the US, the euro area, and Japan, have rolled out large-scale monetary stimulus measures since March, 2020 to respond to the shock of the COVID-19 pandemic that has affected economic development and financial markets. The balance sheets of the US Fed, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan expanded by 77 percent, 50 percent, and 23 percent respectively through 2020, and global liquidity remained extremely ample. The spillover effect of overseas accommodative monetary policies warrants our attention. In general, when major central banks adopt accommodative policies, the liquidity within these countries will leak across borders. In previous crises, as theturbulence in the international financial market easily triggered panic in the market, and funds flew back to the major developed economies amid heightened risk aversion, the impact of such leakage on policy effect was, to some extent, moderated. However, global liquidity that flew back to the major developed countries dwindled during this round of the COVID-19 response. For instance, foreign holdings of US treasuries grew by 3.3 percent in 2008 when the global financial crisis broke out, while such holdings decreased by 3.8 percent during the first 11 months of 2020. Comparatively, the current situation in China is sound, as it is the first country to contain the pandemic, to resume work and production, and to achieve positive economic growth. Overseas fund inflows to China’s bond market exceeded RMB1 trillion in 2020, among which long-term funds from overseas central banks accounted for over 60 percent, with government bonds and policy financial bonds as the main types of purchases. Of course, in the long run, as the pandemic gradually comes under control and the economic recovery becomes clear, the accommodative monetary policies in the major economies may end, and the direction of capital flows may change as well. For a super-large economy like China’s, this is normal, but we should also guard against the risks. As the second largest economy in the world, China made an average of 30 percent of an actual contribution to global economic growth over the past decade; it is no longer a passive receiver of the spillover effect of macro-policies from the advanced economies and it has its own macro policies manifesting such an effect. Moreover, China has been pursuing conventional monetary policies since 2020, and it is one of the few major economies to do so. Conventional monetary policies have the following three features: First, the interest rate remains within the normal range, not falling to zero or into negative territory; Second, the central bank’s balance sheet is basically stable, and the banks’ market-based function of money creation is brought into play normally and effectively; Third, the macro-leverage ratio and the growth pace of money and credit are far below the level during the global financial crisis responses in 2009. On balance, China fairly manages a long-tern equilibrium of stabilizing growth and preventing risks by pursuing a conventional monetary policy. In 2020, with the economy growing at 2.3 percent, China is the only major economy that has achieved positive growth, which is conducive to boosting a global economic recovery and to promote the normalization of monetary policies in other major economies. It was noted at the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee that we will establish a modern central banking system and will strengthen coordination of international macroeconomic policies. Improvements in the mechanism for the coordination, cooperation, and governance of international finance not only reflectstrengthened coordination of international macroeconomic policies but they also constitute an important part of the development of a modern central banking system. In the next stage, in accordance with the guiding principles of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference and from the perspective of improving the mechanism for the coordination, cooperation, and governance of international finance, we will strengthen the coordination of international monetary policies, advance the reform of the international monetary system and financial supervision, actively participate in the construction of a global financial safety net, improve the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism, and promote two-way opening up in the financial sector. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, the COVID-19 pandemic will remain the largest source of uncertainty for the global economy in 2021. Recently, the number of new global cases has remained high, and virus mutations have appeared in multiple locations, while the effectiveness and side-effects of the vaccines, and people’s willingness to get vaccinated, remain uncertain. These factors may continuously influence the economic recovery process. In addition, a long-lasting pandemic might lead to adjustments in industrial chains, supply chains, and the landscape of international trade and investment, which could deeply influence global labor productivity, the inflation rate, and other factors. Second, the sustainability of macroeconomic policies in the advanced economies faces challenges. The IMF estimated that in 2020 the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio in the advanced economies and the emerging market economies reached 13.3 and 10.3 percent, respectively, while the ratio of overall global public debt to GDP approached nearly 100 percent, which illustrates the challenge to maintain the strength of the fiscal stimulus. The major advanced economies have adopted accommodative monetary policies for a long time, with decreasing marginal policy utility, which in turn will worsen the problem of asset price bubbles, wealth inequalities, and debt burdens. Third, the risks in financial markets continue to accumulate. The overlap of pressures in the real economy and vulnerabilities in financial markets has led to an increase in the non-performing loans ratio for the banks in the advanced economies. Due to a lack of prudential supervision, the leveraging behavior of non-banking financial institutions may become an important source of potential risks. As the valuations in capital markets become detached from the economic fundamentals, the risks of market volatility rise. Fourth, there are risks from trade protectionism and geopolitics. In recent years, de-globalization has emerged with rising protectionism and unilateralism, while the pandemic and the economic recession it has caused have further strengthened introspective tendencies in some countries. Amid an increasingly complex international environment, instabilities and uncertainties have increases notably. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In 2020, facing the complex and serious situations at home and abroad, especially the shocks from the COVID-19 pandemic, departments in all regions adhered to the general guideline of making progress while maintaining stability in their work, and they made major strategic achievements to coordinate pandemic containment and economic and social development. With the steady recovery of the national economy, continuous development of industrial production, steady pickup of consumption and investment, robust momentum of exports, and stable employment on the whole, China is expected to be the only major economy in the world with positive economic growth. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in 2020 grew by 2.3 percent year on year to RMB101.6 trillion. By quarters, GDP in Q1 dropped by 6.8 percent year on year, while that in Q2, Q3, and Q4 grew by 3.2 percent, 4.9 percent, and 6.5 percent year on year respectively. 1. Consumption continuously improved, investments steadily rebounded, and foreign trade registered positive growth Residents’ income continuously rebounded, and consumption recovered steadily. In 2020, per capita disposable income registered RMB32189, up 4.7 percent year on year in nominal terms. It increased by 2.1 percent in real terms, slightly lower than economic growth. Residents’ income from wages and salaries recovered steadily, and the income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents. In 2020, total retail sales of consumer goods dropped by 3.9 percent year on year to RMB39.2 trillion, among which those in Q4 grew by 4.6 percent year on year and registered an acceleration of 3.7 percentage points from Q3. Sales of upgraded consumer goods and online retail sales continued their rapid growth. Fixed-asset investments rebounded steadily, and investments in the high-tech industry grew rapidly. In 2020, total fixed-asset investments increased by 2.9 percent year onyear to RMB51.9 trillion. In terms of sectors, the year-on-year growth of investments in infrastructure, the manufacturing sector, and real estate development registered 0.9 percent, -2.2 percent, and 7.0 percent, respectively. Investments in the high-tech industry grew by 10.6 percent, 7.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Specifically, investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector and the high-tech service sector grew by 11.5 percent and 9.1 percent year on year, respectively. Investments in social areas increased by 11.9 percent, among which investments in health care and education grew by 29.9 percent and 12.3 percent, respectively. The momentum of exports was robust, and the trade structure continued to improve. In 2020, imports and exports of goods grew by 1.9 percent year on year to RMB32.2 trillion. Specifically, exports grew by 4.0 percent year on year, with growth in November and December accelerating to 14.9 percent and 10.9 percent respectively, while imports decreased by 0.7 percent year on year. As a result, the trade surplus in goods posted RMB3.7 trillion. The trade structure improved continuously. In 2020, the share of imports and exports under general trade reached 59.9 percent, up 0.9 percentage points from 2019. Imports and exports of private enterprises grew by 11.1 percent year on year, accounting for 46.6 percent of total foreign trade, up 3.9 percentage points from 2019. Exports of machinery and electronics increased by 6 percent year on year, accounting for 59.4 percent of total exports, up 1.1 percentage points from 2019. In 2020, China’s top five trade partners were ASEAN, the EU, the US, Japan, and the ROK, and their trade with China grew by 7 percent, 5.3 percent, 8.8 percent, 1.2 percent, and 0.7 percent year on year respectively. China’s trade with countries along the Belt and Road grew by 1 percent to reach RMB9.37 trillion. Utilized foreign direct investment (FDI) hit a record high, with a further improved structure. In 2020, actually utilized FDI increased by 6.2 percent year on year to RMB999.98 billion. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the service industry grew by 13.9 percent to RMB776.77 billion, accounting for 77.7 percent of total FDI. FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 11.4 percent, among which that of the high-tech service industry grew by 28.5 percent. In 2020, outward investment cooperation remained stable. Outward direct investments (ODI) grew by 3.3 percent to USD132.94 billion, among which non-financial ODI edged down by 0.4 percent year on year to USD110.15 billion. In 2020, investment cooperation with countries along the Belt and Road made steady progress. Non-financial ODI in 58 countries along the Belt and Road grew by 18.3 percent yearon year to USD17.79 billion, accounting for 16.2 percent of total ODI over the same period, up 2.6 percentage points from 2019. In particular, ODI in the leasing/commercial services industry and the wholesale/retail industry witnessed year-on-year growth of 17.5 percent and 27.8 percent, respectively. Box 4 Rational Evaluation of Risks Concerning Household Debt The rising household leverage in China has recently attracted wide attention. The increase is mainly due to growing home loans, consumer loans, and credit card overdrafts, but part of it also represents the operating loans of self-employed businesses, which thereby require objective differentiation and a rational evaluation. At the same time, we need to be highly vigilant of debt sustainability and the potential risks caused by surging household leverage, and refrain from over-relying on consumer finance to boost consumption. The main difference between consumer debt and operating debt lies in a capability to generate revenue for repayment. Although household debt, which is largely consumption-oriented, may be an expedient way of financing, it tends to erode households’ future consumption capacity and therefore may become unsustainable, as consumption activities cannot generate revenue that covers debt obligations and repayment relies primarily on payroll earnings. By contrast, corporate debt is mostly business-related and it finances the purchase of labor, equipment, and raw materials for production and sales, which not only generates revenue for debt repayments but also bolsters consumption through job creation. According to some research, multi-national evidence shows that household debt hangover is worse than that of corporate debt. It should be noted, however, that if household debt finances business activities, then it resembles corporate debt, which makes it the key difference between China’s household leverage and that in other major economies. Therefore, when observing and comparing China’s household leverage, we should exclude the part that finances business activities. Around 20 percent of the household debt in China is business-related, the exclusion of which would put household leverage within a reasonable range compared with other economies. The operating debt in China’s household sector mainly consists of operating loans issued to self-employed businesses. It also includes consumer loansand credit card financing used by these businesses for operational purposes. According to BIS, as of end-H1 2020, the leverage ratio of the household sector in China was 59.1 percent, close to that in the eurozone and Japan. However, after removing the operating debt from the total household debt, the ratio drops to roughly 46 percent, which is still within a reasonable range in a global context.The risks of China’s household debt are generally manageable, although there is limited macro policy space. Against the background of “houses are for living in, not for speculation” and enhanced regulation of consumer finance, the growth of household debt has decelerated from 20 percent in previous years to the current 15 percent, and household leverage has also shown a deceleration. Given the large contribution of operating debt to household leverage, the traditionally high savings rate, the high down payment requirement, and the diversified household debt, the risks related to China’s household debt are still manageable. However, we should be vigilant of the rising leverage of the household sector since 2011. From end-2011 to H1 2020, the leverage increased more than 31 percentage points, leaving very little space for further expansion of household debt and therefore deserves close attention. We need to be highly vigilant of debt sustainability and potential risks due to surging household leverage. First, in terms of consumer finance, some consumer-debtors are irrational in that their prospective income does not match their repayment expenditures and they borrow and spend beyond their future repayment capability,thereby posing potential financial risks. In addition, should businesses expand their production in response to these credit-driven consumption demands, the problem of overcapacity will arise when household debt builds up and the consumer-debtors can no longer repay their debt. This is inconsistent with the need for high-quality development. Meanwhile, some financial institutions have overlooked the risks underlying consumer finance during the rapid expansion of consumer loans. This has led to a significant deterioration of client quality as well as to the prominent problems concerning multiple platforms lending to the same client and over-extending credit to related parties of a client. Since the beginning of 2020, there have been signs of higher non-performing ratios for credit card financing and consumer loans in certain banks. In general, facilitating the building of a new development paradigm entails emphasis on management of the demand side and adherence to a strategic focus of boosting domestic demand so as to stimulate consumption. However, it is inappropriate to expand consumption through an over-reliance on consumer finance. Financial innovations should proceed under prudential regulation, and more efforts should be put into promoting employment and improving social security, the income structure, and the consumption environment. Work should be done to combine the dual tasks of boosting domestic demand and deepening the supply-side structural reform, thereby enhancing the fundamental role of consumption in promoting high-quality economic development. 2. Agricultural production improved, industrial production continued to grow, and the service industry recovered gradually In 2020, the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 3.0 percent, 2.6 percent, and 2.1 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 7.7 percent, 37.8 percent, and 54.5 percent of GDP. The share of tertiary industry in total industry surpassed that of secondary industry by 16.7 percentage points, up 1.0 percentage point from 2019. China witnessed another bumper harvest of grain production and a rapid recovery of hog production. In 2020, the value-added of agriculture grew by 3.0 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.1 percentage points from 2019. Grain output recorded a new high and the annual output has been over 650 million tons for six years in a row. Hogs in stock continued a fast recovery and the decline in hogs available for slaughternarrowed significantly. At end-2020, hogs in stock increased by 31.0 percent year on year and saw quarter-on-quarter growth for five consecutive quarters. In 2020, hogs available for slaughter declined by 3.2 percent year on year. Specifically, the year-on-year growth of hogs available for slaughter turned positive in Q3 and growth in Q4 accelerated to 22.9 percent. Industrial production recovered gradually quarter on quarter, with the economic efficiency of enterprises continuously improved. In 2020, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 2.8 percent year on year, specifically, that in Q4 increased by 7.1 percent. In 2020, the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector saw rapid growth, namely, 7.1 percent and 6.6 percent respectively year on year. This was 4.3 percentage points and 3.8 percentage points higher than that of the IEDS, which played an important role in supporting economic development. In 2020, total profits of the IEDS increased by 4.1 percent year on year and maintained double-digit growth for seven consecutive months, particularly with year-on-year growth in December accelerating to 20.11 percent. According to the Entrepreneur Survey Report conducted in Q4 by the PBC, the Business Climate Index posted 55.8 percent, up 6.4 percentage points from Q3 and 0.2 percentage points from the same period of 2019. The Profitability Index registered 59.8 percent, up 2.5 percentage points from the same period of 2019. The service industry recovered steadily and the modern service industry showed sound growth momentum. In 2020, the Index of Service Production (ISP) was on par with that in 2019. Specifically, the ISP in Q4 increased by 7.7 percent year on year, accelerating by 3.4 percentage points from Q3. In 2020, the value-added of the service industry grew by 2.1 percent year on year, accounting for 54.5 percent of GDP, accelerating by 0.2 percentage points from 2019. In particular, the value-added of the service industry in Q4 grew by 6.7 percent year on year, which was on par with that in Q4 2019. The vitality of the modern service industry was continuously released. The value-added of the information communications/software/IT services sector, the financial sector, and the real estate sector increased by 16.9 percent, 7.0 percent, and 2.9 percent respectively year on year, which contributed to the acceleration in the total service industry by 2.7 percentage points. In December 2020, the Expected Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 60.1 percent, remaining in the expansion area for six consecutive months and demonstrating the strong confidence of enterprises in the development of the market. It should also be noted that due to the pandemic, although some service sectors such as the catering sector resumed, their growth was still relatively slower than that of other sectors. In 2020, revenue of the catering sector decreased by 16.6 percent year on year, decelerating by 7.3 percentagepoints from Q1–Q3 of 2020. 3. The growth of consumer prices decelerated and the decline in producer prices narrowed The growth of consumer prices decelerated. Due to factors such as the pandemic, the gradual recovery of the capacity for hog production, and the high base figure in H2 2019, the CPI had been on a rising trend for some time before falling thereafter, registering a year-on-year growth of 2.5 percent in 2020. Specifically, the growth of food prices grew by 10.6 percent year on year, accelerating by 1.4 percentage points from 2019. The growth of non-food prices grew by 0.4 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.0 percentage point from 2019. The core CPI (food and energy excluded) rose moderately by 0.8 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.8 percentage points from 2019. The decline in producer prices decelerated. In 2020, the Producer Price Index (PPI) mainly moved in the negative territory. However, as industrial production steadily recovered, market demand continuously picked up, and the industrial product prices gradually rose, the PPI in 2020 saw a U-shaped trend and then dropped by 1.8 percent year on year, an acceleration of 1.5 percentage points compared with 2019. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) dropped by 2.3 percent year on year, accelerating by 1.6 percentage points from 2019. In 2020, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI), monitored by the PBC, decreased by 1.2 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.2 percentage points compared with Q1–Q3 of 2020. 4. The decline in fiscal revenue decelerated, and employment generally improved The decline in fiscal revenue decelerated. In 2020, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB18.3 trillion and decreased by 3.9 percent year on year, decelerating by 6.9 percentage points compared with H1 2020. Specifically, tax revenue amounted to RMB15.4 trillion, down 2.3 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue reached RMB2.9 trillion, down 11.7 percent year on year. The domestic value-added tax, domestic consumption tax, and business income tax dropped by 8.9 percent, 4.3 percent, and 2.4 percent year on year, respectively, while the personal income tax increased by 11.4 percent year on year. Fiscal expenditures rebounded gradually. In 2020, expenditures in the national generalbudget saw an increase of 2.8 percent year on year to RMB24.6 trillion, accelerating by 8.6 percentage points compared with H1 2020. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures related to health care and social security/employment grew quickly, registering year-on-year growth of 15.2 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively. In 2020, budgetary revenue from nationwide government-managed funds totaled RMB9.3 trillion, up 10.6 percent year on year. Specifically, revenue from land sales rose by 15.9 percent year on year. Budgetary expenditures from nationwide government-managed funds increased by 28.8 percent year on year to RMB11.8 trillion. Employment was generally stable. At the beginning of 2020, the outbreak of the pandemic resulted in restrictions on economic activities and shutdowns of enterprises, with the job market severely affected. As the pandemic containment achieved positive results, enterprises resumed production and the job market gradually recovered, with employment continuously improving. In 2020, 11.86 million people were newly employed, which was noticeably higher than the expectation of above 9 million, and it fulfilled 131.8 percent of the annual target. In 2020, the surveyed unemployment rate in urban areas was 5.6 percent, lower than the set target of 6 percent. Employment pressures from rural migrants were eased and the employment of graduates was generally stable. The number of rural migrants in 2020 decreased by 1.8 percent year on year to 285.6 million, down 5.17 million from 2019. The average annual revenue of rural migrants increased by 2.8 percent year on year to RMB4,072. In December, the unemployment rate of employees aged between 20 and 24 with college diplomas or above was on par with that in the same period of 2019. 5. The balance of payments and external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. China’s current account surplus stood at USD168.7 billion in Q1–Q3 2020. To be specific, the surplus in trade in goods was USD340.2 billion, whereas the deficit in trade in services was USD116.8 billion. The capital and financial account deficit stood at USD73.8 billion. At end-December, foreign exchange reserves increased by 3.5 percent year on year to USD3.2165 trillion, up USD108.6 billion from end-2019. By end-September 2020, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.2944 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt balance was USD1.2956 trillion, accounting for 56 percent of the total external debt balance.6. Analysis by sector 6.1 The real estate sector In 2020, housing prices remained generally stable in China. Due to the pandemic, housing sales and investments in real estate development witnessed a decrease at the beginning of 2020 but have recovered continuously since March. At end-2020, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built housing prices and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 3.7 percent and 2.1 percent year on year respectively, decelerating 3.1 percentage points and 1.5 percentage points from end-2019. In 2020, the total floor area of sold units increased by 2.6 percent year on year, and housing sales increased by 8.7 percent year on year. In 2020, investments in real estate development grew by 7 percent year on year, decelerating by 2.9 percentage points from 2019. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 7.6 percent year on year, registering a deceleration of 6.3 percentage points from 2019 and accounting for 73.8 percent of total investments in real estate developmentThe growth of real estate loans decelerated. At end-2020, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 11.6 percent year on year to RMB49.6 trillion, a deceleration of 3.2 percentagepoints from end-2019. Outstanding real estate loans accounted for 28.7 percent of the total lending balance. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 14.5 percent year on year to RMB34.5 trillion, a deceleration of 2.2 percentage points from end-2019. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 8.2 percent year on year to RMB9.1 trillion, a deceleration of 6.4 percentage points from end-2019. 6.2 The high-tech manufacturing sector The high-tech manufacturing sector mainly refers to the manufacturing industry with intensive Research and Development (R&D) investments. As a high added-value subset of the manufacturing industry, it represents the trend of high-quality development, covering the manufacturing of pharmaceuticals, aerospace and equipment, electronics and communication equipment, computers and office equipment, medical equipment and instruments, and electronic chemicals. In recent years, under the active guidance of the national innovation-driven strategy, China’s high-tech manufacturing sector has witnessed improvements in quality and effect, accelerated progress, and continuous expansion of scale. In 2020, the pandemic dealt a blow to the high-tech manufacturing industry. However, as major strategic achievements were made in the coordination of pandemic containment with economic and social development, recovery of the high-tech manufacturing sector accelerated, which served as an important prop for economic growth. First, the scale of the sector expanded continuously. Year-on-year growth of the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector turned positive in March 2020 and stood at 7.1 percent in 2020, 4.3 percentage points higher than that of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS). Specifically, the value-added of medical equipment and instruments, of electronics and communication equipment, and of computers and office equipment grew by 12.1 percent, 8.8 percent, and 6.5 percent year on year, respectively, allowing this sector to play a greater role in driving the economy. Second, the economic benefits of the sector recovered steadily. In 2020, the profits of the high-tech manufacturing sector grew by 16.4 percent year on year, an acceleration of 3.5 percentage points from the first three quarters of 2020. Third, investment growth of the sector rebounded stably. In 2020, investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector grew by 11.5 percent, among which those in the pharmaceuticals manufacturing and computers and office equipment manufacturing sectors grew by 28.4 percent and 22.4 percent, respectively. Despite great achievements in the high-tech manufacturing sector, there are still various challenges. First, as the investments in fundamental R&D and key and core technologies are relatively insufficient, China’s industrial structure is at the low andmiddle ends of the global value chain, and its capability for independent innovation is in urgent need of improvement. Second, the share of the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector in GDP remains fairly low, which lags far behind that in the developed economies. Therefore, the role of the sector in driving the economy needs to be enhanced. Third, due to the pandemic, the global supply chain has become regional and localized. In addition, as global economic and trade frictions escalate, China’s high-tech companies are faced with suppression and sanctions from some countries, which pose a serious challenge to the upgrading of the high-tech manufacturing sector. Going forward, China will accelerate development of the high-tech manufacturing sector as required for high-quality development. On the one hand, China will adhere to the structural reform of the supply side, expand investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector, promote the high-tech manufacturing sector to move up the value chain, and guide and create new demand through innovation and high-quality supply. It is necessary to invest more in R&D, make more breakthroughs in key technologies, continue to focus on enhancing quality and effect, and strengthen the guidance of innovation. China will provide professional and medium-to-long-term funding support for sci-tech enterprises through innovating financial service models. On the other hand, China will attach importance to the combination of developing advanced manufacturing clusters and promoting the opening-up. It will continue to attract foreign investment into advanced manufacturing clusters, promote integration of the manufacturing industry into the international industrial chain, and guide and adapt to the great changes brought about by the restructuring of the global industrial chain. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy The year 2020 is a very unusual and extraordinary year. Facing severe and complicated international situations and the arduous tasks regarding domestic reform and stability, and especially the serious impact of COVID-19, the entire nation made concerted efforts under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, and was among the first countries to contain the pandemic, to resume work and production, and to return to a positive economic growth. China achieved significant strategic results in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development. The 13th Five-year Plan wrapped up smoothly, and China is on course to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects. The Chinese economy is steadily recovering. The economic growth recorded 6.5 percent year on year for Q4 2020 and 2.3 percent for the whole year, and the GDP in 2020 exceeded RMB100 trillion. China is the only major economy to record a positive economic growth and one of the few major economies that maintain a normal monetary policy. Looking beyond the near term, the fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run and high-quality development remain unchanged. The Chinese economy is returning to normal with stronger endogenous growth drivers, and the economic fundamentals have improved in general. The recent period has seen significantly rising industrial production and sustained export momentum. Investments in the manufacturing sector are recovering and consumption is in an overall recovery as well. Employment and people’s well-being are secured, market expectations are generally stable, and there are more positive factors in economic development. The financial sector has significantly improved the quality and efficiency of its support for the real economy and has continuously enhanced its support for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and private businesses, providing the real sector with significantly more perceivable benefits. Having achieved major progress in the critical battle against financial risks, the financial system is generally sound and capable of defusing various risks. The RMBexchange rate has been basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and the foreign exchange reserves remain above USD3 trillion. The economy has become more resistant to external shocks. Given that global economic and financial conditions are still complicated and severe, and there are many uncertainties regarding the pandemic and the external environment, the grounds for domestic economic recovery are not yet solid. Since the beginning of Q4 2020, multiple regions around the world have discovered coronavirus variants. COVID-19 cases resurged in major developed economies while the vaccination progress was slower than expected. The rising debt of the public and real sectors poses greater potential risks to financial markets, with the global liquidity being extremely excessive. There is still considerable pressure from imported infections and risks associated with the global economy and financial markets. This winter brought concentrated COVID-19 outbreaks to many places in China, which may cause uncertainties for a further recovery of consumption. The macro leverage ratio temporarily rose because of pandemic responses, and the credit risk of nonperforming loans may appear later, so there are still potential risks concerning regional finance in China. In addition, we must not overlook medium and long-term challenges, such as the accelerating aging of the population, insufficient technological innovation capacity, and increasing constraints on resources and the environment. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance awareness of opportunities and risks. The PBC will focus on taking care of its own matters by properly handling the relationship between reforms and macro-management, short-term and long-term considerations, as well as internal and external equilibria, so as to contribute to high-quality development. Consumer price growth is generally within a reasonable range, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. The CPI in 2020 dropped continuously on a seasonal basis. The CPI growth recorded 2.5 percent in 2020, which is basically within a reasonable range. In Q4 2020, the CPI growth dropped to near zero and occasionally into the negative territory, which was mainly the result of the rebounding of pandemic cases, the fluctuations in pork prices, and the high-base effect. Although the CPI will be further subject to holiday disruptions at the beginning of 2021, these factors are all momentary, and the CPI will likely rise again to a stable level as the base effect and supply disruptions subside. Meanwhile, due to stronger endogenous growth drivers and the continuous recovery of industrial production, the prices of the means of production have grown more rapidly since the beginning of Q4 2020. The PPI’s negative year-on-year growth narrowed further and is likely to turn positive in the short term. Despite this, short-term price movements deserve close attention giventhe uncertainties concerning the future path of the pandemic and the impact of containment measures on supply and demand. In the medium and long term, the Chinese economy is expected to witness a stable growth. Given that the aggregate supply and demand are basically in equilibrium, monetary policies remain sound, and monetary conditions are reasonable and appropriate, there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, the PBC will continue to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and will fully implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference. It will firmly implement the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council by adhering to the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and by following the requirements of the new development stage, applying the new development philosophy, and fostering a new development paradigm. Giving top priority to ensuring stability, the PBC will focus on what is important, defend the bottom line, and live up to its responsibilities in an effort to consolidate and further the success achieved in pandemic control as well as in economic and social development, while maintaining policy continuity, stability, and sustainability. Work will also be done to improve macroeconomic governance, to build a modern central banking system, to conduct a cross-cyclical policy design, to achieve a balance of economic aggregates, and to promote structural optimization as well as both internal and external equilibria. Moreover, the PBC will continue to do its part well in ensuring stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and in maintaining security in six areas, namely, employment, people's basic livelihood, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains and the normal functioning of primary-level governments, thereby contributing to a good start for the establishment of a new development paradigm and bringing on a new look. The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate, giving top priority to ensuring stability and refraining from taking sharp turns. At the same time, the PBC will manage the timing, intensity, and effectiveness of policy, properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention, and keep sustainable room for the conduct of a normal monetary policy. To pursue the objective of “maintaining the stability of the currency value and thereby promoting economic growth”, the PBC will improve the mechanism of money supply management, using a mix of monetary policy tools to keep liquidity adequate at areasonable level so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be basically in line with nominal economic growth and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. In the process, flexible adjustments will be made to the intensity, pace, and focus of policy to accommodate changes in the circumstances. The role of structural monetary policy tools in targeted liquidity provision will be effectively brought into play, while steps will be taken to build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the economy. The PBC will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system and deepening the loan prime rate (LPR) reform. It will also consolidate the achievements made in lowering real lending rates and will stabilize and reduce overall financing costs for enterprises. While giving play to the decisive role of market supply and demand in the formation of exchange rates and enhancing the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, the PBC will strengthen macro-prudential management to stabilize market expectations and will guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk- neutral so that the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. More efforts will be put into monitoring and analysis as well as expectation management in order to keep prices basically stable. To firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability and will resolve prudently the risks associated with individual institutions and the risks arising in key fields, while further steps will be taken to hold all relevant parties accountable and to broaden channels for the replenishment of bank capital. Moreover, work will be done to guide and create new demand with innovations and high-quality supply and to accelerate the establishment of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. First, the PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. It will employ a mix of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), open market operations (OMOs), central bank lending, and central bank discounts, to meet the reasonable demand of financial institutions for short-, medium- and long-term liquidity. Through targeted and effective operations, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level without adopting indiscriminate stimulus measures. The PBC will improve the long-term mechanism of liquidity, capital and interest rate constraints used for central bank adjustments of bank money creation so as to properly control the general valve of money supply and to keep economic growth close to its potential output growth. Work will be done to guide market rates to move around OMO rates and MLF rates. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for sustainable replenishment ofbank capital to support bank issuances of perpetual bonds, such as convertible perpetual bonds, and to step up support for capital replenishment by small and medium-sized banks via issuance of perpetual bonds, so that banks will be better able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Measures will be taken to improve macroeconomic governance, to optimize monetary policy objectives as well as fiscal, employment, industry, investment, consumption, environmental protection, regional and other policy objectives, and to promote a reasonable division of duties and an efficient synergy. Second, the PBC will make effective use of central bank lending, central bank discounts, and the monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy to bring into play their roles in targeted liquidity provision. On the one hand, the countermeasures introduced in extraordinary times will be adjusted prudently and follow-up arrangements will be made, while the two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy, i.e., the policy of deferring principal and interest repayments for micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans, will remain in place. On the other hand, the PBC will innovate and improve the system of structural monetary policy tools, design the incentive compatibility mechanism in a targeted way, and guide financial institutions to ramp up support for those fields in conformity with the new development philosophy. It will continue to use inclusive central bank lending and central bank discount policies to increase financial support for sci-tech innovations, MSBs, and green development. In an effort to implement the important decisions on peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality, the PBC will attach importance to policy designs and planning and will establish policy incentives and constraints to channel financial resources to the fields of green development. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. Measures will be taken to improve the system for providing financial support for innovation and to develop fund chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby giving rise to a virtuous cycle and triangular interactions among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector, and industries to promote the industrialization and large-scale application of new technologies. The PBC will push ahead with the regulated development and innovation of supply chain finance by implementing supporting policies step by step in collaboration with the relevant agencies and providing targeted services to support the completeness and stability of supply chains and industrial chains. The rural financial services system will be improved. Financial support will be provided to ensure that the work done to consolidate and further the achievements of poverty eradication be linked up effectively with rural revitalization efforts, while financial support policies for regionslifted out of poverty will be kept generally stable. Credit supply will be increased to support key agricultural fields, such as development of the seed industry and food security. Measures will also be taken to broaden the range of collaterals according to laws and regulations and to innovate rural financial products and services. The PBC will push further ahead with the project aimed at enhancing commercial banks’ capacity to provide financial services for MSMEs, taking steps to improve external incentives and constraints as well as banks’ internal policy arrangements, and to foster, through the application of science and technology, a long-term mechanism whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism to make loans. Additionally, financial institutions will be guided to step up credit support for the manufacturing sector and other key fields. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices, and expectations and will maintain the continuity, consistency, and stability of real estate finance policies. It will also implement rules for prudential management of real estate finance and improve financial support policies for the rental of housing. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. To enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, it will improve the central bank policy rate system in which OMO rates are taken as short-term policy rates and MLF rates as medium-term policy rates, and it will advance the reform of money market benchmark rates so that market rates are guided to move around policy rates. Continued efforts will be made to deepen the LPR reform, to consolidate the achievements made in lowering real lending rates, and in the process to gradually give rise to market-oriented deposit rates. The self-regulatory mechanism for market rate pricing will play its part in regulating the conduct of deposit rate pricing while deposit management will be tightened, with locally incorporated banks prohibited from providing cross-regional deposit services. And the requirement will be reinforced that lending entities of all types give explicit indications of annualized loan rates so as to safeguard a level playing field in the market and to protect the rights and interests of consumers. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, maintain the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and explore the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. Work will be done to stabilize market expectations, to guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will steadily advance the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and facilitate the use of the RMB in cross-border tradeFifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental institution building in financial markets so that they can play an effective role in stabilizing growth, promoting structural adjustments, advancing reform, and guarding against risks. It will support bond financing by private enterprises and enhance the ability of the financial sector to serve the real economy. It will implement the Administrative Measures for Information Disclosures Regarding Corporate Debenture Bonds to promote a unification of standards. The mechanism of bond default risk prevention and resolution will be improved in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. The PBC will enhance coordinated regulation over financial market infrastructure and accelerate steps to advance the interconnectivity between bond market infrastructure so as to ensure that financial markets are generally safe and stable while performing efficiently. Efforts will be made to steadily move ahead with the two-way opening-up of the bond market and to introduce more medium and long-term investors. Sixth, the PBC will push further ahead with the reform of financial institutions and make continued efforts to improve corporate governance and optimize financial supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, more work will be done to deepen the reform of large commercial banks and to establish a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. Large banks will be guided to shift their focus of services to the primary level and increase efficiency so as to provide better services for MSBs and private enterprises. Through improvements of monetary, regulatory and tax rules, small and medium-sized banks and rural credit cooperatives will be encouraged to focus on their main duties and businesses and to reassume their roles in serving local needs and their original purposes, while an effective mechanism of checks and balances in governance will be established. Measures will be taken to reform and optimize development finance and policy finance and to carry out classified accounting so that they will be better able to support national strategies. Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability. It will safeguard financial security, improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, take quick action to shore up the weaknesses of regulatory institutions, and firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Work will be done to ensure that the development of financial innovations be brought under prudential regulation and to stabilize and improve the quality and competitiveness ofinclusive financial services. Stress tests fully covering the banking system will be conducted. To enhance the soundness of financial institutions and their sustainable management capacity, the PBC will support banks, particularly small and medium-sized banks, to replenish capital through multiple channels and improve their governance. Efforts will be intensified to set aside loss provisions for non-performing loans and carry out write-offs while deposit insurance institution building and the organizational structure will be improved. Endeavors to defuse risks will be advanced prudently, with particular attention paid to wrapping up ongoing risk resolutions. The PBC will further define the respective responsibilities of all concerned parties to see that they truly perform their duties and join efforts to resolve risks. A possible resurgence of risks must be contained. Under no circumstances will local risks be allowed to evolve into systemic risks, nor will regional risks be allowed to evolve into national risks.
Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2021, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, following the guiding principles of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference and implementing the requirements of the Report on the Work of the Government, the People's Bank of China (PBC) stuck to a sound monetary policy, which is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate, and it devoted to maintaining its continuity, stability, and sustainability. It placed greater priority on serving the real economy, and it balanced the needs of promoting an economic recovery and preventing risks. At present, liquidity is adequate at a reasonable level, money and credit are maintaining reasonable growth, and financial support for the real economy remains solid. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In Q1 2021, the PBC pursued a sound monetary policy that is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. By comprehensively using multiple policy tools to inject liquidity, including central bank lending, central bank discounts, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), and open market operations (OMOs), and to iron out short-term disturbances such as cash injections before and after the lunar new year, tax levies, and quarter-end factors in a timely manner, the PBC kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, averted any cash crunch ahead of the festival and excess liquidity afterwards, and maintained stable market expectations as well as smooth movement of money market interest rates. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened communications with the public in many ways and made monetary policy operations more targeted and effective. Short-term interest rates in the money market were guided to move around the 7-day reverse repo rate within a reasonable range, and policy rates were further exploited as a pivot. At end-March, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.5 percent, down 0.6 percentage points from the corresponding period of the previous year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the credit structure optimized and the lending rates at low levels Money and credit saw reasonable growth. With the deepening of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, significantly enhanced efficiency of monetary policy transmission and continuous rapid growth of credit supply buttressed the economic recovery and the overall momentum for stability and progress. At end-March, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 12.3 percent year on year to RMB186.4 trillion, increasing RMB8 trillion from the beginning of the year and RMB673.4 billion more than the increase in the corresponding period of 2020. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 12.6 percent year on year to RMB180.4 trillion, up RMB7.7 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an increase that was RMB574.1 billion larger than that during the corresponding period of the previous year. Credit supply at an appropriate pace ensured continuous, stable, and sustainable support for the real economy and boosted stamina to serve high-quality development. The credit structure continued to improve. Medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB4.5 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion. At end-March, medium and long-termloans to the manufacturing sector gained 40.9 percent, accelerating for seventeen consecutive months. In particular, high-tech manufacturing witnessed a year-on-year increase of 45.0 percent. Outstanding inclusive loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) grew by 34.3 percent year on year to RMB16.7 trillion, 4 percentage points higher than that at end-2020. These loans supported 35.27 million MSBs, an increase of 26.6 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rates on loans remained at low levels. In 2021, the PBC continued to release the potential of the LPR reform and give full play to its role in optimizing resource allocations. In a market-oriented approach, financial institutions are encouraged to allocate more financial resources to MSBs, to improve the competitiveness of MSBs in obtaining loans, and to cut profits in favor of the real economy. In March, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.85 percent and 4.65 percent, respectively, both equal to that in December 2020. The weighted average lending rate recorded 5.10 percent in March, remaining at a historic low. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 5.30 percent, down 0.18 percentage points year on year. The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.19 percentage points to 4.63 percent. This indicates that financial support for the real economy continues to yield positive results.In March, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 69.54 percent, 8.42 percent, and 22.03 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign currency deposits and loans dipped. In March, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.14 percent and 0.55 percent, respectively, down 0.02 and 0.04 percentage points from December 2020. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.23 percent and 1.09 percent, up 0.01 percentage points and down 0.27 percentage points from December 2020, respectively.Deposits grew steadily. At end-March, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB227.2 trillion, up 10.1 percent year on year, 0.1 percentage points lower than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB220.9 trillion, up 9.9 percent year on year, 0.3 percentage points lower than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD956.8 billion, an increase of USD67.5 billion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of USD59.9 billion year on year, which was against a backdrop of better economic fundamentals, a widened trade surplus, and a growing willingness on the part of enterprises to hold foreign exchange in China.III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew moderately At end-March, outstanding M2 recorded RMB227.6 trillion, up 9.4 percent year on year. Outstanding M1 registered RMB61.6 trillion, up 7.1 percent year on year. Outstanding M0 reached RMB8.7 trillion, up 4.2 percent year on year. The first quarter witnessed a net cash injection into the economy of RMB222.9 billion, a fall of RMB360.4 billion year on year. According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) reached RMB294.55 trillion at end-March, up 12.3 percent year on year and a deceleration of 1 percentage point over the end of the previous year. In Q1, the incremental AFRE reached RMB10.24 trillion on a cumulative basis with a decrease of RMB873.0 billion year on year, making it the second largest quarterly increase. Growth of AFRE remained generally stable with the following features. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-year increase. Second, both entrusted loans and trust loans experienced net decreases, while undiscounted bankers’ acceptances saw a year-on-year increase. Third, the year-on-year increase of corporate bonds narrowed, while that of equity financing expanded. Fourth, affected by local government special bonds, government bond financing recorded a narrow year-on-year increase. Fifth, the increases of both asset-backed securities of depository financial institutions and of written-off loans edged up compared with the same period of the previous year.Box 1 Improving the Framework for Modern Monetary Policy The Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee proposed "building a modern central banking system," To build a modern central banking system, we need to improve the framework for modern monetary policy, support high-quality economic development, and foster a new development paradigm. A modern monetary policy framework consists of optimized monetary policy objectives, innovative monetary policy instruments, and smooth monetary policy transmission mechanisms. The central bank needs to constantly innovate its monetary policy instrument system, give full play to the role of policy tools, improve the transmission efficiency of monetary policy, and achieve the objectives of monetary policy, all of which are expected to be combined into an organic whole. 1.Sticking to the ultimate objective of currency stabilization and optimizing the anchoring of the intermediary objective According to the Law on the People’s Bank of China, the ultimate objective of monetary policy is “to maintain the stability of currency value so as to promote economic growth”. The key to price stability lies in maintaining an aggregate monetary supply as appropriate. As China gears into high-quality development, its economic growth turns to be more innovation-driven. Therefore, growth of money supply compatible with development of the real economy will be more in line with nominal economic growth, which calls for supporting high-quality development with moderate growth of money supply. The Central Economic Work Conference in 2020 and the 14th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development and Long-Range Objectives through the Year 2035 proposed that growth of money supply and AFRE should be generally aligned with nominal economic growth, thus clearly defining the “anchor” of the monetary policy framework. The anchoring of the intermediary objective is conducive to formulating appropriate cross-cycle policies and stabilizing monetary aggregates in the long run. Based on the changes in the macro-economic situation, it also contributes to the convergence of growth of M2 and AFRE toward the nominal economic growth underlying potential output growth, which, therefore, provides a more scientific and rational anchor for the implementation of macro policies. Moreover, it also helps to guide the formation of reasonable and stable market expectations. Embedded with a stabilizing mechanism for the macro leverage ratio, the anchoring of the intermediary objective is conducive to achieving a long-term equilibrium between stabilizing growth and preventing risks. In the meanwhile, the PBC will increase the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and strike abalance between internal and external equilibria. 2.Improving the operational target system of the central bank and smoothing the channels for monetary policy transmission In recent years, the PBC has deepened the market-based interest rate reform, promoted the formation mechanism for the LPR, and significantly raised the transmission efficiency of monetary policy. As the pricing benchmark of the credit market, the LPR plays an important role in adjusting the demand and supply of credit, thus affecting money supply. Keeping the LPR at a reasonable level helps stabilize the “anchor” of money supply. The LPR is formed with reference to the quotations based on policy rates and in a market-based manner. The PBC guides the market rates represented by the DR007 to move around the policy rates by improving the policy rate system with the OMO rates as the short-term policy rates and the MLF rates as the medium-term policy rates. The market-based interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, which applies throughout the process from the policy rates to the LPR and then to the real lending rates, is further improved to adjust the demand and supply of funds and the allocation of resources and to achieve the objectives of monetary policy. It is worth noting that there are two types of practices with regard to the operational targets of the central banks’ monetary policies globally. One is to take market rates as the operational target and to guide the market rates to move within a range of the operational target through the adjustment of liquidity. The other is to set the interest rates of monetary policy instruments as the central bank’s policy rates, or operational targets. Therefore, the operational targets, policy rates, and interest rates of the monetary policy instruments are integrated. In the wake of the 2008 gobal financial crisis, the advantage of the second practice in improving the effectiveness and transmission efficiency of monetary policy was more apparent and gradually became the mainstream. The PBC also adopts the more direct second practice in setting up its operational target system. When observing the orientation of monetary policy, the market and the public only need to observe whether the policy rates have changed and they should avoid paying excessive attention to the volume of open market operations, the transaction rate of an individual institution, or the interest rate at a certain point of time, which may be disturbed by short-term factors. 3.Innovating monetary policy instruments and improving the mechanism for money supply management In terms of the aggregates, the PBC improves the long-term mechanism for adjusting the liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on banks’ money creation. Targeting the banks, which are direct money creators, the PBC employs a mix of monetary policy instruments so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The PBCpromotes banks to replenish capital through multiple channels by means of bank-issued perpetual bonds. Moreover, the PBC promotes the LPR reform, removes the implicit floor of interest rates, guides the downward movement of lending rates, relieves the liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints faced by banks in money creation, and keeps the growth of money supply and AFRE basically in line with nominal economic growth. In terms of the structure, the PBC sets up a system that enables the financial sector to provide effective support for the real economy. The PBC continues to improve the structural monetary policy instrument system, and links the volume and price of liquidity with the banks’ deposit creation from loans through the design of an incentive-compatible mechanism. In accordance with the needs of economic development at different stages, the PBC adjusts its policy priorities dynamically and guides financial resources to flow into key areas and weak links of the national economy, such as scientific and technological innovations, micro and small businesses, as well as green development, so as to promote the sustainability and resilience of the economy. In general, in terms of monetary policy, the PBC sticks to the ultimate target of currency stability, improves the intermediary target of keeping the growth of money supply and AFRE basically aligned with nominal economic growth, and integrates the policy targets with a sound market-based mechanism for interest rate formation and transmission and a better mechanism for money supply management, all of which contribute to the construction of a modern monetary policy framework. Being more open, transparent, and direct, the framework improves the efficiency of communications between the central bank and the public, reduces the costs of communications, effectively guides expectations, enhances the fairness of public access to information, and increases the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission, which is conducive to creating a favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow Since the beginning of 2021, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q1, the RMB exchange rate appreciated against the basket of currencies. At end-March, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index andthe RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 96.88 and 95.66, respectively, up 2.15 percent and 1.52 percent from end-2020. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), at end-March 2021, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 2.15 percent and 2.10 percent from end-2020, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange-rate formation mechanism commenced to end-March 2021, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated by 40.63 percent and 54.55 percent, respectively. In Q1, the RMB exchange rate depreciated slightly against the US dollar. At end-March, the central parity of the RMB against the USD was 6.5713, down 0.71 percent from end-2020, appreciating by 25.95 percent on a cumulative basis from the launch of the reform of the exchange-rate formation mechanism in 2005. In Q1, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rate against the USD was 3.9 percent. In Q1 2021, cross-border RMB settlements totaled RMB9 trillion, up 48 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB4.6 trillion and RMB4.3 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 17 percent year on year to RMB1.7 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB1.3 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and other items registered RMB412.97 billion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account posted RMB7.3 trillion, up 58 percent year on year.Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q1 2021, the PBC resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and kept the sound monetary policy flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. The PBC conducted open market operations in a targeted manner, advanced market-based reforms of the interest rate and the exchange rate, further leveraged the targeted guidance role of structural monetary policy instruments and channeled more funds into key areas and weak links, including scientific and technological innovations, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and green development, thus fostering a favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development. I. Conducting open market operations effectively Conducting open market operations in a targeted manner. In Q1 2021, many uncertainties, particularly considerable disruptions brought about by the Spring Festival, affected liquidity supply and demand in the banking system. Amid Covid-19 prevention and control, the PBC fully analyzed the factors affecting supply and demand of funds, such as cash injections during the Spring Festival and fiscal revenue and expenditures, planned in advance, fine-tuned dynamically, conducted operations in a targeted manner, and guided market expectations through various means, such as explaining the central bank’s operations around the Spring Festival in the Announcement on Open Market Operations and a number of other documents. As a result, market liquidity was kept stable, with a record low level of liquidity supply before the Spring Festival. Meanwhile, short-term reverse repo operations conducted before the Spring Festival all matured within just several trading days after the Festival, and liquidity was maintained at a level that was “neither tight before the Festival nor loose after the Festival.” Seven-day reverse repo operations were conducted successively in appropriate amounts after the Spring Festival in the open market to maintain a precise balance of fund supply and demand and to ensure liquidity stability at the end of the quarter. Guiding market rates to move around the central bank policy rates. Since the beginning of 2021, both the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) rate and the reverse repo rate have remained unchanged, demonstrating a sound monetary policy stance. Meanwhile, the PBC improved the continuity of open market operations,steadily sent short-term policy rate signals through daily operations of the 7-day reverse repo, and guided short-term money market rates to move around the open market operation rates within a reasonable range. The open market operation rates have played an increasingly important role as the pivotal short-term market rates. In Q1 2021, the weighted average rate on the 7-day repo between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) averaged 2.21 percent, very close to the open market operation rate of 2.2 percent on the 7-day reverse repo. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q1 2021, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. At present, the PBC conducts CBS operations regularly on a once-in-a-month basis, and these operations play a positive role in improving liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially small and medium-sized banks. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q1 2021, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. The regular issuance of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong not only enriched RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in the Hong Kong market but also drove both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market, thus promoting the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market. In Q1 2021, offshore RMB bond issuances, other than the RMB-denominated central bank bills issued in Hong Kong, registered roughly RMB48 billion, a year-on-year increase of 50 percent. Moreover, the RMB offshore market saw increasingly brisker transactions.Box 2 The Central Bank Conducts Open Market Operations in a Targeted Manner In recent years, the framework of China’s monetary policy operations have continued to improve, open market operations (OMOs) have become more scientific, transparent, flexible, and targeted, and market liquidity has remained appropriate and abundant. The rates of open market operations reflect signals of the central bank’s policy rates, play a growingly pivotal role in the market, and effectively guide money market rates to move around the central bank’s policy rates. The key to observing open market operations is the price rather than the amount. In Q1 2021, the PBC conducted open market operations in a targeted manner, effectively offsetting seasonal disruptions such as the Spring Festival and the end of a quarter. Due to Covid-19 prevention and control and other factors during the Spring Festival, liquidity conditions differed significantly from previous years, and uncertainties grew as well. The PBC followed up on the latest developments in Covid-19 prevention and control in real time, strengthened relevant analysis and research, and made rolling forecasts for cash injections, fiscal revenue and expenditures, demand for funds in the market, and other factors. Through measures that aimed at “planning in advance, fine-tuning dynamically, conducting operations ina targeted manner, and guiding expectations,” the PBC achieved its operational target, i.e., maintaining stable market rates before and after the Spring Festival. Before the Spring Festival, a total of RMB430 billion was injected into the market for the holiday, the lowest injection amount in recent years. Meanwhile, to enhance the transparency of monetary policies and to stabilize market expectations, the PBC explained in advance in the Announcement on Open Market Operations that “cash demand before the Spring Festival is expected to decrease notably and fiscal expenditures are expected to increase by a relatively large amount,” enabling the market to better understand the central bank’s policy implications. In practice, the money market before and after the Spring Festival remained stable, and the DR007 remained close to the open market operation rate of 2.2 percent on 7-day reverse repos, reflecting a sound monetary policy stance that is neither loose nor tight, and thus the central bank’s open market operations became more targeted and forward-looking. At present, it has become a regular practice for the PBC to conduct MLF operations at a fixed time in the middle of each month and to conduct open market operations successively each day. As a result, the efficiency of monetary policies has improved significantly as the PBC has continuously released policy rate signals and has guided market rates to move around policy rates. Meanwhile, when conducting open market operations, the PBC gave priority to short-term benchmark rates in the money market, such as the DR007, and gave full consideration to cash injections and withdrawals, fiscal revenue and expenditures, market demand, and other factors to flexibly adjust the size and maturity of OMOs. Therefore, when observing the central bank’s open market operations, rather than focusing too much on the amount of OMOs, the market should focus more on the policy rates including OMO rates and MLF rates as well as the movement of the benchmark market rates over a certain period of time, and it should refrain from over-interpreting the monetary policy stance. At the beginning of this year, money market rates rose for a short period of time, as short-term liquidity demand grew by a relatively large margin amid loose market expectations. Compared with other developing countries, the volatility of China’s money market rates was not high. Moreover, moderate fluctuations of market rates also show that the market mechanism plays its part with normal pricing functions. With the deepening of the market-based interest rate reform, China has gradually developed a central bank policy rate system, with the MLF rates and the open market operational rates serving as medium-term and short-term policy rates respectively, and the central bank operation rates have gradually played pivotal roles. The movement of market rates around the central bank policy rates shows that the policy rates not onlyguide markets rates effectively but also fully reflect changes in market supply and demand for funds, demonstrating that the market mechanism has played a decisive role in the formation of interest rates. Meanwhile, in light of the macro economic and financial situations and monetary policy objectives, the central bank sets the policy rates and guides the movement of market rates, which not only meets the needs of a central bank to fulfill its functions in monetary management but also embodies the philosophy that monetary policies serve the real economy with the people as the center. Going forward, in line with the requirement that the sound monetary policy should be kept flexible and targeted, and at a reasonable and appropriate level, and adhering to the principle that stability should be made a top priority, the PBC will continue to ensure an appropriate aggregate monetary supply, deliver a good cross-cycle liquidity arrangement, conduct open market operations in a targeted manner, maintain an appropriate and abundant level of liquidity in the market, improve the market-based interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, and guide market rates to move around policy rates, thus providing a favorable liquidity environment for the building of a new development paradigm. II. Timely conducting Standing Lending Facility and Medium-term Lending Facility operations Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. An appropriate supply of medium- and long-term liquidity was ensured, giving full play to the signaling and guiding functions of the medium-term policy rate. In Q1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB800 billion of MLF operations, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.95 percent. At end-March, the outstanding MLF registered RMB5.35 trillion, RMB200 billion more than that at the beginning of the year. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner. The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was met in the full amount. In Q1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB47.5 billion SLF operations, and the balance of SLF operations registered RMB6.4 billion at end-March. The SLF played its role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, thus promoting smooth performance of the money market. At end-March, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates were 3.05 percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent,III. Further improving the macro-prudential policy framework The role of the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In Q1 2021, in line with the requirements for the key tasks deployed at the Central Economic Work Conference, the PBC further improved the framework of the MPA and attached more importance to the assessment requirements for banks in terms of supporting the key areas and weak links in the real economy. Through adjusting and optimizing the assessment indicators in a dynamic manner, the PBC guided financial institutions to further enhance their support in issuing loans to inclusive MSBs and medium and long-term loan to the manufacturing sector. Meanwhile, non-local deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks were included in the MPA, thus safeguarding the competitive order in the deposit market and maintaining stable debt costs of banks. The macro-prudential adjustment coefficients were optimized. First, the Notice of the PBC and the SAFE on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Parameter for Cross-border Financing of Companies (Yinfa No.5 [2021]) was released, lowering the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing of non-financial companies from 1.25 to 1. Second, the Notice of the PBC and the SAFE on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Coefficient for Domestic Companies Extending Overseas Loans (Yinfa No.2 [2021]) was issued, raising the macro-prudential adjustment coefficient for overseas loans issued by domestic companies from 0.3 to 0.5. The management system for the real estate loan concentration was put into place in an orderly manner. Following the establishment of the real estate loan concentration management system at end-2020, the PBC, in collaboration with the CBIRC, directed their provincial-level branches to appropriately set the management requirements for the real estate loan concentration of locally incorporated banks, and urged commercial banks whose concentration level had exceeded the cap to formulate adjustment schemes for the transition period. Currently, the credit structure has been optimized in an orderly manner, and the management system for the real estate loan concentration has entered a phase of conducting and implementing a normal policy.The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was improved. The PBC, jointly with the CBIRC, drafted the Additional Regulatory Rules on Systemically Important Banks (Trial) (Exposure Draft) (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), and solicited public opinion starting from April 2. The Rules, as a general framework for additional regulation of systemically important banks, specified additional regulatory requirements in terms of an indicator system, recovery and resolution schemes, and prudential regulatory measures. The regulatory system for financial holding companies (FHCs) was improved. Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC has made proactive efforts to conduct administrative approvals of FHCs. On March 31, it released the Interim Regulations on Filing-based Management of Directors, Supervisors, and Senior Executives of Financial Holding Companies (Order No.2 [2021] of the PBC) (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations). The Regulations clarified that the PBC should perform filing-based management of directors, supervisors, and senior executives of FHCs and specified the eligible conditions for personnel and the relevant filing procedures. In addition, the PBC reinforced appointment management so as to guard against the risks associated with personnel in key positions by regulating behavior, such as holding concurrent posts, performing acting duties, and publicizing personnel information. IV. Actively leveraging the role of structural monetary policy instruments The PBC actively used central bank lending to support rural development, central bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other tools to guide financial institutions to step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural people as well as poverty alleviation. The role of central bank lending was further brought into play in providing targeted liquidity and serving as positive incentives so as to underpin and consolidate the effective links between the achievements of poverty eradication and rural revitalization. Good use was made of central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects to increase credit supply to the “three autonomous regions”, i.e., Tibet, the four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, the areas in the four provinces with large Tibetan populations, and the “three autonomous prefectures”, i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, and to lower the financing costs in these areas as well as to consolidate and expand the achievements of povertyeradication. In Q1, central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects was issued in the amount of RMB8.8 billion, with the balance reaching RMB45.8 billion at end-March. As of end-March, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development registered RMB442.2 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB929.5 billion and RMB209.0 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB574.4 billion. In Q1, the PBC made a net withdrawal of PSLs in the amount of RMB41.0 billion from policy and development banks, with the outstanding PSL registering RMB3.1940 trillion at end-March. The TMLFs maturing in Q1 were rolled over in the form of MLFs. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions to expand their credit supply to MSBs and private firms with preferential interest rates. On January 15, the PBC conducted one-year MLF operations totaling RMB500 billion, with an interest rate of 2.95 percent, including the rolling-over of the TMLFs maturing in Q1. The instrument can be rolled over for up to 3 years. At end-March, the outstanding TMLFs totaled RMB56.1 billion. With highlighted characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy were continuously promoted with the aim of bolstering the development of MSMEs. In line with the arrangements made at the executive meeting of the State Council, on March 30 the PBC, jointly with CBIRC, Ministry of Finance (MOF), National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), issued the Notice on Relevant Issues Concerning Further Extending the Implementation Periods for the Policy of Deferring Principal and Interest Repayments of Inclusive MSB Loans and for the Support Policy for Unsecured Loans (Yinfa No.81 [2021]), so as to ensure the continuity, stability, and sustainability of the policies. By extending the application period of two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy to December 31, 2021, the PBC maintained support for the MSBs and leveraged the policies in stabilizing employment. From the beginning of 2020 to end-March 2021, banking institutions nationwide deferred payments totaling RMB9.2 trillion of loan principals and interest repayments and issued cumulative inclusive unsecured MSB loans totaling RMB5.3 trillion.V. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reform Financial support to keep businesses and employment stable was enhanced. A symposium was held on adjusting the credit structure of major nationwide banks. The PBC strengthened policy guidance, encouraged banks to continuously improve financial services to MSBs, and promoted MSB financing featuring “increased volume, lowered price, improved quality, and expanding coverage.” Banks were encouraged to increase the supply of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector so as to promote its high-quality development. Effective support was provided to consolidate and expand the achievements of poverty eradication. In terms of poverty alleviation, the “Four Withouts” requirement was strictly followed, i.e., lifting areas out of poverty without loading off responsibilities, without abolishing policies, without ceasing support, and without removing supervision. Major financial support policies were kept generally stable, the role of central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and serving as a positive incentive was continuously brought into play, and financing costs were reduced for agriculture, rural areas, and rural people. Micro-credit loans were effectively provided to people out of poverty. Secured loans for start-ups and student loans were continuously implemented. Efforts were made to provide subsequent financial services following the residents’ removal from impoverished areas and to carry out research on strengthening inputs of financial resources into key counties to assist in the project of national rural revitalization. Resource inputs were further enhanced to support rural revitalization. Measures were taken to provide effective financial services for key areas, such as spring farming, tillage preparation, grain security, seed industry development, and high-standard farmland construction. The PBC supported loan businesses secured by pledges or collateral, including agricultural machinery and tools, greenhouse facilities, the right of contracted rural land management, and it encouraged financial institutions to issue special financial bonds for agriculture, rural areas, and rural people in an attempt to expand the sources of funding with low costs. VI. Further deepening the market-based interest rate reform The PBC continued to unleash the potential of reform in reducing loan interest rates,optimized regulation of deposit interest rates and pushed actual loan rates to go further downward. First, with continued progress in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and use of the LPR, the financing costs of enterprises witnessed an obvious decline. Second, order in the credit market was regulated. In March 2021, the PBC issued an announcement requiring all banks to explicitly indicate the annualized interest rates of their loan products and specifying the interest calculation rules so as to protect the rights of financial consumers to be informed. Third, the PBC strengthened deposit management, regulated the pricing of deposit rates, and banned locally incorporated banks from absorbing non-local deposits. The PBC explicitly required financial institutions to stop new issuances of deposit products with periodic interest payments and urged them to conduct the pricing in a scientific and rational way so as to maintain competitive order in the deposit market. The PBC incorporated non-local deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks into the MPA and forbade locally incorporated banks from absorbing non-local deposits through various channels, with the outstanding balance settled when coming due. Until now, financial institutions have basically completed rectification of deposit products with periodic interest payments. Most locally incorporated banks have halted the business of absorbing non-local deposits, with the balance brought down in an orderly manner. This will help maintain the stability of the banks’ costs in assuming debts and will create a favorable environment for promoting the market-based interest rate reform and the steady decline in the comprehensive financing costs for enterprises. VII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate in adjusting the macro economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q1 2021, the highest and lowest CNY central parities were 6.4391 and 6.5713, respectively, against the USD. During the 58 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 27 days and depreciated on 31 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 1.00 percent (648 bps) and 0.83 percent (543 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rates against other major international currencies floated in twoways. At end-March 2021, the central parities of the RMB against the euro and the Japanese yen had appreciated 4.81 percent and 6.18 percent respectively from end-2020, while the RMB central parity had depreciated 0.71 percent and 1.56 percent against the dollar and the pound during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism commenced in 2005, the RMB has appreciated by a cumulative total of 25.95 percent, 30.01 percent, and 22.68 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen through end-March 2021. Direct RMB trading was buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and to facilitate bilateral trade and investment.As of end-March, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB60.862 billion, and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD512million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment. VIII. Promoting resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner and deepening the reform of financial institutions Risk resolution and reform and restructuring of small and medium-sized financial institutions have been promoted in an orderly manner. The PBC strove to ease the impact of the pandemic and achieved crucial progress and important initial results in the resolution of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions. The reform and restructuring plan of Hengfeng Bank was carried out smoothly, and the risk resolution, reform, and restructuring of Jinzhou Bank was basically completed so as to ensure the sound operation of the financial system during the critical and sensitive period and to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Risk resolution of the Baoshang Bank (BSB) was advanced steadily and orderly. Since the takeover of the BSB, there has been steady progress, breaking the rigid payments in an orderly manner and completing asset and capital verifications on schedule. On November 23, 2020, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court ruled to accept the bankruptcy petition of the BSB, and it appointed a liquidation group as the administrator of the BSB. On January 12, 2021, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court held a creditors’ meeting for the first time, and the administrator completed a review of the rights of 743 creditors. On February 7, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court issued its ruling on the BSB’s bankruptcy. Equities of the former shareholders were cleared, and large-denomination creditors bore part of the losses, which means risk resolution of the BSB has been basically completed. Going forward, following the delivery of assets and alteration of the body of proceedings and arbitration, the administrator will complete the de-registration of the BSB and its affiliates as soon as possible. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC advanced the reform plans for development and policy financial institutions across the board to redefine their responsibilities and the scope of their business, improve corporate governance, strengthen the constraints and incentive mechanism, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policyfinancial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control. IX. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements The pilot program of trade facilitation was advanced to expand the coverage and raise the quality. The pilot areas and business scope were expanded steadily and orderly, business procedures were optimized, and market participants were guided to continuously improve their credit rating, administrative capability, and internal control. Until now, the pilot program has been expanded to 22 areas. Facilitation of individuals’ foreign exchange business was promoted. The State Administration of Foreign Exchange issued the Notice on Further Promoting Facilitation of Individual Foreign Exchange Business under the Current Account (Huifa〔2021〕13), further optimizing the filling items and methods and enhancing the filling efficiency. Administration of the foreign exchange market was strengthened. The fostering of the capability of off-site monitoring was enhanced and continuous efforts were made to severely crack down on illegal financial activities, such as underground banks and cross-border gambling. Emphasis was placed on investigating false and deceptive transactions so as to maintain a healthy order in the foreign exchange market. In Q1 2021, a total of 661 cases violating the regulations of the foreign exchange administration were handled, with total fines amounting to RMB216 million. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In Q1 2021, the financial market operated generally smoothly, with firm support for the real economy. The money market remained stable, with interest rates fluctuating within a reasonable range and market transactions growing in a steady manner. The bond market featured declined bond coupon rates, narrowed credit spreads, increased bond issuances, and active cash bond transactions. The stock market index fell after arise, and both turnover and the amount of funds raised witnessed year-on-year surges. I. Financial market overview 1. The money market operated in a steady manner The money market interest rate was stable. In March, the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.01 percent, higher than that in end-2020 and getting close to that in end-2019. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond repos among depository institutions posted 1.91 percent, 10 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. In March, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending posted 2.01 percent. At end-March, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.12 percent and 2.25 percent, respectively. Market transactions experienced steady growth. In Q1 2021, the volume of trading of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB223.2 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.7 trillion and a year-on-year increase of 8.5 percent, down 9.1 percentage points from that in 2020. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB29.1 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB485.1 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 11.6 percent. In Q1 2021, the volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 20.7 percent year on year to RMB75.8 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses operated steadily. In Q1 2021, 7,489 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB5.6 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB35.1 trillion. At end-March, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB12.0 trillion. In Q1 2021, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.83 percent, 11 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 20,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions in Q1 2021, raising RMB3.8 trillion, with an increase of RMB200 billion year on year. The interest rate swap market witnessed orderly development. In Q1 2021, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 75,000 transactions, increasing 23.0 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB5.4 trillion, an increase of 24.8 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB3.6 trillion, accounting for 68.0 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 85.7 percent and 13.2 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q1 2021, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 290 transactions, withRMB28.85 billion of the notional principal.The loan prime rate (LPR) interest rate option business developed steadily. The LPR interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market in March 2020, and the fixing repo rate (FDR) options was newly added to the interbank market on March 29, 2021. In Q1 2021, a total of 177 interest rate option transactions were concluded, totaling RMB23.64 billion. Specifically, 29 were interest rate swap transactions, amounting to RMB1.52 billion of the notional principal, 148 were interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB22.12 billion of the notional principal, 112 were LPR interest rate transactions, totaling RMB 19.79 billion of the notional principal, and 65 were FDR interest rate transactions, amounting to RMB3.85 billion of the notional principal. 2. Coupon rates of bonds declined while bond issuances expanded On the whole, coupon rates of bonds declined. In March 2021, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 3.22 percent, 3 basis points lower than that in December 2020. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank was 3.52 percent, 13 basis points lower than the rate in December 2020. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.56 percent, 66 basis points lower than the rate in December 2020. Government securities yields went up slightly. At end-March, yields on 1-year and 10-year government securities increased by 10 basis points and 5 basis points to 2.57 percent and 3.19 percent from end-2020, respectively. Credit spreads narrowed, withcredit spreads on 3-year AAA and AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills narrowing by 16 basis points and 29 basis points from end-2020, respectively.Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In Q1, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 16.7 percent, or RMB2 trillion, year on year to RMB14.1 trillion, most of which were financial bonds, which increased by RMB1.9 trillion. At end-March, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB120 trillion, an increase of 16.6 percent year on year. The volume of cash bond transactions on the interbank market decreased, while that on the stock exchanges maintained growth. In Q1, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB51.3 trillion, registering a decrease of 1.5 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of bond trading on the interbank market was RMB46.1 trillion, representing a decrease of 5.5 percent year on year. The value of bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB5.2 trillion, an increase of 56.5 percent year on year.3. Bill financing increased while maintaining stability, and interest rates in the bill market went up The bill acceptance business maintained stability. In Q1, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB6.1 trillion, rising 1.4 percent year on year. At end-March, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.1 trillion, increasing by 4.9 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances remained stable, decreasingby RMB2.5 billion from the beginning of this year. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 68.6 percent were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing was basically stable. In Q1, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB11.4 trillion, growing 3.8 percent year on year. At end-March, the balance of bill financing was RMB7.9 trillion, down 4.5 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.4 percent of total outstanding loans, down 0.8 percentage point year on year. 4. Stock indices first went up and then went down, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year on year In Q1, stock indices went up before going down, and then, after mid-March, they stabilized. From the beginning of this year to the Spring Festival, due to the continuous consolidation of the momentum for restorative economic growth and the rise of overseas stock markets, the major stock indices in Shanghai and Shenzhen experienced a choppy rise. In February, the highest closing points of the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index posted 3,732 points and 16,293 points, respectively. After that, the A-share market retreated. At end-March, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,442 points, decreasing 0.9 percent from end-2020. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 13,779 points, decreasing 4.8 percent from end-2020. Turnover on the stock markets expanded. In Q1, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB54.9 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB947.2 billion, an increase of 9.9 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets surged significantly year on year. In Q1, a cumulative RMB340.4 billion was raised, increasing 142.6 percent year on year and providing solid support for the real economy. 5. Growth of premium income accelerated, while growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down In Q1, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB1.8 trillion, up 7.8 percent year on year, an acceleration of 1.7 percentage points from the same period of the previous year. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB395.1 billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 30.4 percent. Specifically, total propertyinsurance claims and benefit payments increased 35 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went up by 27 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-March, total assets in the insurance sector increased 11.7 percent year on year to RMB24.3 trillion, a deceleration of 1.6 percentage points from end-2020. Specifically, bank deposits decreased by 3.5 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 19.1 percent year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions were active In Q1, cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD2.3 trillion, an increase of 39.8 percent year on year. Cumulative turnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD4.5 trillion, an increase of 37.9 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD2.9 trillion, accounting for 64 percent of the total swap turnover. Turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD25.8 billion, falling 4.2 percent year on year. Turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD312.9 billion, rising 167.6 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 57.2 percent of the total market share.7. Gold prices went down At end-March, international gold prices closed at USD1,691.05 per ounce, representing a loss of 10.58 percent from end-2020. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB356.79 per gram, decreasing 8.52 percent from end-2020. In Q1, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 9,333.37 tons, representing a decrease of 48.3 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB3.51 trillion, a decrease of 45.2 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market In April 2021, the PBC, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), and the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) jointly released the Notice on Issuing the Green Bond Endorsed Projects Catalogue (2021 Edition). The notice aimed to further regulate the domestic green bond market and to give full play to the active role of green finance in promoting structural adjustments and transformation, accelerating the construction of an ecological civilization and facilitating sustainable economic development to realize the goals of peak carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. 2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures industry Regulation of capital market conduct was further improved. In January 2021, the CSRC released the Provisions on Strengthening Regulation of Private Equity Investment Funds, which raised prohibitive requirements, namely the “ten prohibitions,” for entities, including private equity managers. The provisions reiterated and strengthened regulation of the bottom lines in the operation of private equity funds. In January, the CSRC released Guideline No.3 for the Operation of Publicly Offered Securities Investment Funds - Index Fund Guidelines, which regularized the investment and operations of index funds and protected the legitimate rights and interests of investors. In February, the CSRC revised and released the Provisions on the Registration and Management System of Insiders with Inside Information on Listed Companies, aiming to regularize the registration and reporting of insiders with inside information on listed companies and to strengthen comprehensive prevention and control of insider trading. In February, the CSRC revised and released the Measures for the Administration of the Credit RatingBusiness in the Securities Market. The measures replaced administrative licensing with filing management, improved the rules for the securities rating business, and incorporated independence requirements. The reform of registration-based securities systems was carried forward. In February 2021, the CSRC revised and released the Measures for the Administration of Issuance and Trading of Corporate Bonds, with the registration prerequisites, registration procedures, and relevant regulatory requirements clearly specified. In March, the CSRC released the amended Measures for the Administration of Information Disclosures by Listed Companies, which improved the basic requirements for information disclosures, upgraded the periodic reporting mechanism, and lowered the costs of information disclosures. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market Regulation of the solvency of insurance companies was strengthened. In January 2021, the CBIRC revised and released the Regulations on Solvency Management of Insurance Companies. The regulations, with a risk-oriented approach, specified regulatory rules of solvency that integrated quantitative capital requirements, qualitative regulatory requirements, and market discipline mechanisms, thus making clear the three-pillar framework of solvency regulation. The short-term health insurance business was regulated. In January 2021, the CBIRC released the Notice on Regulating the Short-term Health Insurance Business, which regulated the short-term health insurance business conducted by insurance companies in such areas as insurance renewals, product sales, information disclosures, and underwriting and claims settlement. The insurance industry was further opened up. In March 2021, the CBIRC released the Implementation Rules of the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on Foreign-funded Insurance Companies, and removed the clauses concerning foreign ownership limits on joint-venture life insurance companies to maintain consistency among the relevant institutional systems. Meanwhile, the detailed rules further elaborated on the entry criteria for foreign insurance group companies and foreign financial institutions to invest in foreign-funded insurance companies. Supplementary improvements were made to clarify the requirements for market access and for changes of shareholders in foreign-funded insurance companies, relevant managementsystems for domestic insurance group companies, security reviews of foreign investment, etc. 4. Promoting the opening-up of the bond market The semi-annual review by FTSE Russell was facilitated and conducted successfully. FTSE Russell announced that it would, starting from October 29, 2021, add Chinese government bonds to its World Government Bond Index (WGBI) in a time span of 36 months. So far, all three global major bond index providers have included Chinese bonds in their major indexes. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments The global economy has gradually recovered, and vaccinations have accelerated. Markets tend to hold optimistic expectations about future economic prospects, with rising inflation expectations. Meanwhile, the imbalance in the process of economic recovery became prominent, as evidenced by enlarging divergences among different countries and regions, industries and enterprises, employment groups, as well as financial and real sectors, while the recent COVID-19 resurgence in multiple countries further increased uncertainties about an economic recovery. In the future, attention should be paid continuously to possible adjustments or shifts in the monetary policies of the major advanced economies and their spillover effects. 1. Performance in the economic and financial markets of the major economies The speed of the vaccination process has accelerated, but the COVID-19 pandemic has reoccurred since late March. By the end of April, more than 1 billion vaccine doses had been administered worldwide. However, progress was uneven among regions amid mutations of the virus and relaxation of pandemic containment measures in some areas; the global pandemic has resurged, with the number of single-day newly confirmed cases returning to over 800,000 at the end of April. Multiple countries in Europe have tightened their pandemic containment measures, among which France, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and other countries have restarted nationwideExpectations about global economic growth have improved significantly. In March, the manufacturing PMI posted 64.7, 62.5, 52.7, and 58.9 in the US, the euro area, Japan, and the UK, respectively, all reaching new highs since the outbreak of the pandemic. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) posted their global economic growth forecasts for 2021 at 6.0 and 5.6 percent in April and March respectively, 0.5 and 1.4 percentage points higher than their previous forecasts. Recovery of the labor market was relatively slow. The US unemployment rate registered 6.0 percent in March, and the number of jobs was reduced by 7.5 million from the pre-pandemic level. The labor participation rate was 61.5 percent, lower than the pre-pandemic rate of 63.3 percent at the end of 2019. The unemployment rates in the euro area in March and the UK in February was 8.1 and 4.9 percent, respectively, which were still relatively high. Signs of re-inflation occurred in the major economies. In March, the year-on-year (y-o-y) growth rate of the CPI increased to 2.6 percent in the US. In Q1, the HICP in the euro area ended its negative y-o-y growth that had lasted for 5 consecutive months in the second half of last year, and it posted a y-o-y growth rate of 1.3 percent in March. The y-o-y decrease in the CPI in Japan narrowed significantly from that at the end of last year. Inflation pressures increased in some emerging market economies, as the y-o-y growth rate of the IPCA of Brazil and the CPI of Russia moved higher in March, to 6.1 and 5.8 percent respectively, increasing by 2.8 and 3.3 percentage points compared to the same period of last year.Affected by factors such as expectations of rising economic growth and inflation as well as adjustments of market expectations, volatility in financial markets increased. Commodity prices surged with the futures prices of Brent crude oil, and tin, copper, and aluminum in the London Metal Exchange (LME) increased by 24.3, 24.0, 13.6, and 11.7 percent in Q1, respectively. Treasury yields went up remarkably in the advanced economies, with the 10-year treasury yields increasing from 0.93 and -0.57 percent at the beginning of the year to 1.74 and -0.27 percent at the end of March in the US and Germany, respectively. The stock markets in the major economies have generally increased with greater volatility.Box 3 Analysis of the Higher US Treasury Yields This year has seen a rapid rally of US Treasury yields. On January 6, the 10-year Treasury yield rose above 1 percent for the first time since March 2020, and then reached 1.74 percent on March 31, up 120 bps from the record low of 0.51 percent last year and 83 bps from year-end. The rise in Treasury yields is attributed to both inflation expectations and higher real rates. This year, the real rate as measured by the 10-year US Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) has increased 46 bps to -0.63 percent at end-March, while the spread between the 10-year Treasury yield and the real rate has increased 37 bps, with the latter usually reflecting inflation expectations. Strengthened fiscal support and improved expectations of an economic recovery have both contributed to higher inflation expectations and real rates. With continued vaccination progress, the global economy is generally making a steady recovery. In the World Economic Outlook published in April, the IMF raised its global growth forecast for 2021 from 5.5 percent in January to 6 percent, and revised its growth forecast for the US from 5.1 percent to 6.4 percent.As of now, there will continue to be a high issuance of US Treasuries in 2021. From a supply-demand perspective, holding all else constant, the gap between supply anddemand of US Treasuries may be bridged by higher yields. On the supply side, in the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031, the Congressional Budget Office projected a deficit of USD2.3 trillion for the 2021 fiscal year, which would be magnified by the USD1.9 trillion fiscal stimulus package; meanwhile, in its first quarter refund announcement, the US Treasury expected the cash balance to drop about USD1.2 trillion to USD0.5 trillion at end-June. In these three respects, institutions have projected that new financing needs may exceed USD2.5 trillion in 2021, and they expect continued high issuance of US Treasuries. On the demand side, if the Federal Reserve continues its monthly purchases of USD80 billion of Treasuries in 2021, it can absorb about USD1 trillion Treasuries, leaving more than USD1.5 trillion to other market investors. Recent years have seen a drop in the proportion of foreign-held Treasuries, from 34.4 percent at the beginning of 2015 to around 25 percent at end-2020. Therefore, there will continue to be a large amount of Treasuries for US domestic investors other than the Fed. The subsequent movement of Treasury yields depends on the economic performance, the inflation level, and the Federal Reserve’s response. In August 2020, the Federal Reserve introduced a new policy framework featuring average inflation targeting. How it is implemented is left for further observation. Fed Chair Jerome Powell expressed in an interview that when the economy is near a full recovery, the Fed will pull back its policy support during emergency times “very gradually” and “with great transparency”; and when the Fed makes further substantial progress toward its goals, it will gradually roll back the amount of asset purchases. In the future, if fiscal support is strengthened and a strong economic recovery leads to an excessively rapid rise in inflation expectations, they may trigger actions by the Fed that will affect the trend in U.S. bond yields. The impact of higher Treasury yields will be transmitted through several channels: first, through asset prices. They will drive up risk-free rates and trigger global asset price adjustments and bring about repricing risks. Second, through capital flows. They may reverse the direction of cross-border capital flows, causing funds to flow back to the US and to increase the risks of capital outflows in the emerging markets. Emerging economies with weak fundamentals may face repayment and refinancing risks. Third, through exchange rates. Higher Treasury yields may boost the dollar and place downward pressures on the currencies in some emerging economies, thereby intensifying debt risks. China has become the second largest economy, with resilience and sufficient policy space as well as sound economic performance. Bracing for the impact of COVID-19,China was the only major economy with positive growth in 2020 and one of the few major economies conducting a normal monetary policy, thus presenting unique performance. Meanwhile, as the market-oriented exchange rate reform has further deepened, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible and has fulfilled its role as an automatic stabilizer for macroeconomic management and for the balance of payments. Since the beginning of 2021, the Chinese financial market has been stable, with the RMB exchange rate floating in both directions and cross-border capital flows generally in equilibrium. Overall, higher U.S. Treasury yields and future policy adjustments by the Fed will have a limited and controllable impact on China. The key to the next step is to focus on fulfilling the PBC’s mandates, prioritize stability in monetary policies, remain proactive, and value the normal policy space. Meanwhile, the PBC will pay close attention to changes in global economic and financial conditions, enhance macro-prudential management of cross-border capital flows, strengthen flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and carry out international macro policy coordination based on domestic conditions. 2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major advanced economies have generally reiterated their stance of maintaining their loose monetary policies to support a more comprehensive economic recovery. In Q1, both the US Fed and the European Central Bank (ECB) kept their policy rates and scale of asset purchases unchanged, and the minutes of the March FOMC meeting of the US Fed illustrate that the Fed will maintain its accommodative stance until the statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability are reached. The Bank of Japan (BOJ) maintained its JPY12 trillion upper limit of exchange traded funds (ETFs) purchases and widened its target range for yield curve control, allowing the 10-year treasury yield to move up and down by 0.25 percent around zero. Monetary policies in the emerging market economies showed signs of divergence. Although most maintained accommodative stances, some economies took early actions to respond to the pressures of inflation, exchange rate depreciations, and capital outflows, and marginally tightened their monetary policies. In Q1, the central banks of Indonesia and Mexico lowered interest rates by 25 bps, with the policy rates of the central banks of India, South Africa, Malaysia, and the Philippines remaining unchanged, while the central banks of Turkey, Brazil, Ukraine, and Russia increased their policy rates by 200, 75, 50, and 25 bps, respectively.3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, the global economic recovery still faces high uncertainties, with increasing divergences and imbalances. For some time in the future, the key determinant of a global economic recovery will still be containment of COVID-19. Currently, vaccination progress and the outcomes of pandemic prevention and control have been rather divergent across countries amid diversified macroeconomics policies and market recovery capacities, thus resulting in significantly uneven economic development. Some areas are experiencing a marked rebound of new cases and a tightening of their lock-down measures, and their economic recovery processes are facing great challenges. Second, the influence of the ultra-loose macro policies by the major economies and the risks brought about by monetary policy shifts require close attention. At the end of Q1 2021, the balance sheets of the US Fed, the ECB, and the BOJ expanded by 85 percent, 60 percent, and 25 percent, respectively, compared to those at the end of 2019. The expansions mainly resulted from purchases of government bonds, with over half of the newly issued US treasury bonds purchased by the Fed in 2020. The fiscal and monetary policies of the advanced economies are closely integrated, and their scale is huge, pushing global asset prices to rise, to be separated from the real economy, and causing financial risks continue to increase. Whether these risks will be transferred in the future through sovereign debt risks, high inflation, exchange-rate and interest-rate fluctuations, or valuation adjustments in stock and bond markets needs to be closely watched. In Q1, the rise in long-end interest rates in the US triggered higher volatility in global financial markets and brought about greater pressures of capital outflows and an exchange rate depreciation in some emerging market economies with fragile economic fundamentals. The Bank of Canada (BOC) reduced the scale of asset purchases in April. If the major advanced economies release clear signals of monetary policy shifts in the future, the potential spillover effects will further magnify the fluctuations in global cross-border capital flows. Third, the level of global inflation may continue to trend up. The global economic recovery has driven up the demand for commodities and raw materials; amid the ultra-loose liquidity environment the prices of international commodities, such as iron ore, copper, crude oil, and soybeans, have increased rapidly. Given the low base effect from last year, the y-o-y readings of the global inflation indices may generally trend up for some time in the future, leading to further increases in inflation expectations.II. Macroeconomic developments in China In Q1 2021, achievements to coordinate pandemic containment and economic and social development in all regions and departments across the country were consolidated and expanded. China’s economy continued to recover steadily, and the development momentum became stronger. The national economy got off to a good start as production continued to resume its growth, all three demands, i.e., consumption, investment, and export, rebounded steadily, consumption played a greater role in economic growth, and employment and consumer prices were stable. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in Q1 2021 grew by 18.3 percent year on year and increased by 10.3 percent compared to the same period of 2019. The average growth rate of GDP in the past two years was 5 percent and the CPI was basically flat compared with the previous year. 1. Consumption gradually improved, investments steadily rebounded, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth. Residents’ income rebounded steadily, and people’s willingness to consume improved. In Q1, the country’s per capita disposable income increased by 13.7 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 13.7 percent in real terms, and its average growth rate in the past two years was 4.5 percent. The structure of income distribution improved, and the income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q1, 22.3 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” up 0.3 percentage point from the same period of 2020. In Q1, total retail sales of consumer goods grew by 33.9 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during the past two years was 4.2 percent. Consumption by urban residents and online retail sales continued to grow rapidly. Final consumption expenditures contributed to 63.4 percent of economic growth, which contributed to the growth of GDP by 11.6 percentage points and a year-on-year increase of 15.9 percentage points. Investments rebounded steadily, and investments in the high-tech industry and social areas grew rapidly. In Q1, total fixed-asset investments increased by 25.6 percent year on year, and the average growth rate in the past two years registered 2.9 percent. In terms of sectors, the year-on-year growth of investments in social areas registered 31.7 percent, with an average growth rate of 9.6 percent in the past two years.Investments in real estate development and infrastructure increased by 25.6 percent and 29.7 percent respectively, and the average growth rate in the past two years registered 7.6 percent and 2.3 percent, respectively. Investments in the manufacturing sector increased by 29.8 percent and the average growth rate was slightly negative in the past two years. The investment structure was further optimized. Investments in the high-tech industry grew by 37.3 percent year on year, 11.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Specifically, investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector and the high-tech services sector grew by 41.6 percent and 28.6 percent year on year, respectively. Export momentum was robust, and the trade structure was more optimized. In Q1, imports and exports of goods denominated in RMB grew by 29.2 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 38.7 percent year on year, while imports grew by 19.3 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods posting RMB759.3 billion, an increase of RMB663.3 billion year on year. The trade structure continued to improve. The share of imports and exports under general trade reached 61.2 percent, up 1.3 percentage points year on year. Imports and exports by private enterprises accounted for 46.7 percent of total foreign trade, up 4.4 percentage points year on year. Exports of machinery and electronics increased by 43 percent year on year, accounting for 60.4 percent of total exports. Exports of high-tech products increased by 38.9 percent year on year, accounting for 29.9 percent of total exports. China’s trade partners became more diversified. China’s trade with countries along the Belt and Road and with RCEP trade partners grew by 21.4 percent and 22.9 percent, respectively. The expectations and confidence of foreign direct investment (FDI) were stable with promising signs, and FDI became concentrated in the high-tech industry. In Q1, actually utilized FDI increased by 39.9 percent year on year to RMB302.5 billion, which was 24.8 percent higher than that in the same period of 2019. Actual utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 32.1 percent year on year, among which FDI in the high-tech service industry grew by 43.9 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production remained stable, industrial production rebounded steadily, and growth of the service industry recovered In 2020, the value-added of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 8.1 percent, 24.4 percent, and 15.6 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 4.6 percent, 37.2 percent, and 58.3 percent of GDP. The average growth rate of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries was 2.3 percent, 6.0 percent, and 4.7 percentrespectively in the past two years. Agricultural production was generally stable and hog production witnessed a significant recovery. Climate conditions in the main agricultural areas of China were generally favorable, as spring ploughing and sowing went smoothly, contributing to slightly better growth of winter wheat than in previous years. In Q1, the value-added of agriculture grew by 3.3 percent year on year, and the average growth rate was 3.4 percent during the past two years. Hogs in stock increased by 29.5 percent year on year and hogs available for slaughter increased by 30.6 percent year on year. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 21.4 percent year on year, among which the output of pork increased by 31.9 percent year on year. Industrial production grew steadily, and business profits improved significantly. In Q1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 24.5 percent year on year and the average growth rate in the last two years registered 6.8 percent. The value-added of IEDS in Q1 increased by a seasonally adjusted 2.01 percent quarter on quarter, which was slightly higher than that in Q4 2020. Specifically, the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector increased by 31.2 percent and 39.9 percent respectively year on year, with the average growth rate in these two sectors posting 12.3 percent and 9.7 percent in the past two years respectively, significantly higher than the rates in other sectors. In Q1, total profits of the IEDS increased 1.37 times year on year and the average growth rate registered 22.6 percent during the past two years. According to the Entrepreneur Survey Report conducted in Q1 by the PBC, the Business Climate Index posted 56.3 percent, up 0.5 percentage points from Q4 2020 and 26 percentage points from the same period of 2020. Growth in the service industry recovered, and market expectations improved. In Q1, the value-added of the service industry grew by 15.6 percent year on year, accounting for 58.3 percent of GDP, an acceleration of 3.8 percentage points from 2020, and the average growth rate was 4.7 percent during the past two years. In March, the Index of Service Production (ISP) increased by 25.3 percent year on year, and the average growth rate registered 6.8 percent during the past two years. The Business Activities Index for the railway sector, aviation sector, satellite transmission service of the telecommunication/broadcasting/television sector, internet software and information IT services sector, and the financial sector exceeded 60 percent, remaining in an expansion area. The Business Activities Index for accommodations, housing rentals，business services, and residents’ services, once affected notably by the pandemic in certain regions at the beginning of 2021, rebounded to a prosperous range and operations in these sectors improved significantly. The Expected Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 62.9 percent, remaining above 60 percent for two consecutive months. 3. Consumer prices were generally stable, and the growth of producer prices expanded Consumer prices were generally stable. In Q1, both the CPI and the core CPI (food and energy excluded) were basically flat compared with the previous year. Due to the decline in the base figures from the initial high levels in the previous year, the CPI in January and February decreased by 0.3 percent and 0.2 percent year on year, respectively and rose by 0.4 percent year on year in March. As the capacity for hog production gradually recovered, pork prices declined for six consecutive months and dropped by 12.5 percent year on year in Q1, driving down food prices by 0.2 percentage point. Non-food prices decreased by 0.1 percent year on year. The growth of producer prices expanded. In Q1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 2.1 percent year on year, an acceleration of 3.5 percentage points compared with Q4 2020. The growth rate of PPI in January, February, and March registered 0.3 percent, 1.7 percent, and 4.4 percent, respectively. Due to the steady recovery of domestic needs, the growth of prices of bulk commodities, such as oil, and the relatively low base figures in the previous year, the growth of PPI expanded year on year. Production materials that are highly connected to price trends in bulk commodities, such as oil, steel, and nonferrous metals, contributed to the acceleration of PPI by 2.13 percentage points. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by 2.8 percent year on year, accelerating by 4.2 percentage points from Q4 2020. The Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI), monitored by the PBC, increased by 3.2 percent year on year, accelerating by 4.4 percentage points compared with that in 2020. Box 4 How to View the Recent Price Movements Both at Home and Abroad The global commodity price and inflation indexes of the major economies have recently shown an upward trend. At end-April 2021, the price indexes of WTI crudeoil futures, LME copper futures, and CRB spot commodities registered year-on-year growth of 187 percent, 89 percent, and 51 percent, respectively. In March, the CPI in the US and the HICP in the euro area grew by 2.6 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively, year on year, accelerating by 2.5 percentage points and 1.6 percentage points from the low point in 2020. These figures are higher or at par with the pre-pandemic level in December 2019, and the relevant indexes of inflationary expectations have gone upward to varying degrees. In addition, in March the Consumer Price Index in Russia and Brazil grew over 5 percent and 6 percent year on year, respectively. The major factors pushing up commodity prices and inflation are as follows. First, the governments of the major economies have introduced large-scale stimulus packages, and it is widely expected that overall demand will tend to be exuberant. Second, as there has been an obvious COVID-19 resurgence overseas and the supply side is still facing constraints, the recovery of demand in global economies will outpace that of supply in the post-pandemic era. Third, central banks in the major economies have adopted ultra-loose monetary policies, and global liquidity continues to remain extremely ample. At present, as the above-mentioned three factors cannot be eliminated in the short run, global inflation is likely to continue its moderate upward trend for some time. As far as China is concerned, the influence of the imported inflation from overseas is mainly reflected in the price rise of industrial products. Combined with the low base in 2020, this is likely to push up the growth of PPI in China in Q2 and Q3 2021. China is the major importer of commodities. In terms of import volume and reliance, the commodities influencing PPI are mainly crude oil, iron ore, and copper. In particular, crude oil is the biggest factor behind PPI movements, as its down-stream industrial chain is fairly long, and it has an impact on the price of chemical products. The temporary rise in the PPI during this year should be viewed historically and objectively. First, the PPI has, to some extent, registered a “high reading” upon a “low base.” In 2020, due to the impact of the pandemic and the considerable drop in commodity prices, PPI growth in China was below -2 percent for seven consecutive months and it hit a low of -3.7 percent in April 2020. Therefore, PPI movements in 2021 will mainly be affected by the “mirroring effect” of the low base (see Figure 6). On average, annual PPI growth from 2020 to 2021 will still remain within a reasonable range. Second, historically the PPI has witnessed relatively large fluctuations, and it is not rare that the PPI temporarily underwent a considerable drop or a surge within a few months. During the past twenty years, the averageyear-on-year PPI growth posted about 1.2 percent on a monthly basis, with the standard deviation reaching 4.2 percentage points. Large swings in the PPI are common around the globe. Third, the rise in commodity prices reflects a temporary “mismatch” between supply and demand. If the pandemic is effectively contained and capacity for production and supply in the emerging economies returns to normal, the rise in prices for the means of production is likely to slow down. In general, the PPI is likely to stabilize as the base effect subsides and global production and supply recovers.In terms of its impact on China’s consumer price index, during recent years the transmission relationship between PPI and CPI in China has been significantly weakened and the fluctuations in international bulk commodity prices have had a correspondingly low impact on China’s trends. In addition, hog supply at home has basically stabilized and pork prices are overall tending to go down. China has witnessed consecutive bumper harvests of grain production for several years and its self-sufficiency ratio of agricultural products is fairly high. Therefore, according to preliminary estimates, CPI growth in 2021 will be moderate and will remain within a reasonable range as the overall impact of external factors will be controllable. In fact, considering that China is one of the largest economies, a rise in global commodity prices is not likely to trigger a notable imported inflation, if it does not overlap with rising domestic demand..According to the comprehensive analysis, although the global commodity price hike is likely to push up China’s PPI at the current stage, the risk of imported inflation is overall controllable. In response to the pandemic, China has maintained a normal monetary policy and has refrained from adopting a deluge of strong stimulus policies in 2020. Given the steady and sound economic development and the basic equilibrium in aggregate supply and demand, there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. Undoubtedly, efforts should be made to closely watch the differentiated impact of the rise of commodity prices on different sectors and businesses. Comprehensive measures should be implemented to ensure supply and to stabilize prices, to timely and effectively manage expectations, and to prevent the price fluctuations from getting out of control. 4. The growth of fiscal revenue and expenditures recovered, and, on the whole, employment was stable The growth of fiscal revenue recovered. In Q1 2021, revenue in the national general public budget increased by 24.2 percent year on year to RMB5.7115 trillion, accelerating by 38.5 percentage points compared with Q1 2020. Central and local fiscal revenue grew by 27.2 percent and 21.7 percent year on year, respectively. Specifically, tax revenue increased by 24.8 percent year on year, with the domestic value-added tax and the domestic consumption tax growing by 23.9 percent and 18.5 percent year on year, respectively, while non-tax revenue increased by 20.7 percent year on year. Fiscal expenditures were on the whole stable. In Q1 2021, expenditures in the national general budget saw an increase of 6.2 percent year on year to RMB5.8703 trillion, accounting for 23.5 percent of annual expenditures in the budget. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures on education and science and technology grew by 13.8 percent and 16.3 percent, respectively, expenditures on infrastructure slowed down, while expenditures on agriculture, forestry, and water resource projects dropped by 5.5 percent, and expenditures on transportation dropped by 7.8 percent year on year. The surveyed urban unemployment rate dropped, and the employment situation was generally stable. In Q1 2021, 2.97 million people were newly employed, up 680,000 year on year. As pandemic containment and collective recruitment in the spring were advanced in an orderly manner, the surveyed urban unemployment rate declined on both on a year-on-year and a month-on-month basis. In March, the surveyed urbanunemployment rate was 5.3 percent, down 0.2 percentage points month on month and down 0.6 percentage points year on year. Specifically, the surveyed unemployment rate of populations between the ages of 25 and 29 was 4.8 percent, 0.5 percentage point lower than the surveyed urban unemployment rate. 5. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. In Q1 2021, China’s current account surplus registered USD75.1 billion. Specifically, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD118.7 billion, whereas trade in services recorded a deficit of USD22.3 billion. The capital and financial account deficit was USD75.1 billion. At end-2020, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.4008 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt balance was USD1.3164 trillion, accounting for 55 percent of the total external debt balance. At end-March 2021, foreign exchange reserves posted USD3.17 trillion, down 1.5 percent, or USD46.5 billion from end-2020. 6. Analysis by sector 6.1 The real estate sector In Q1 2021, housing prices remained generally stable in China. Due to the low base figure in the previous year, housing sales and investments in real estate development grew remarkably year on year. In March, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 4.4 percent and 3.3 percent year on year respectively, accelerating by 0.7 percentage point and 1.2 percentage points from end-2020. In Q1, total floor area of sold units increased by 63.8 percent year on year, registering average growth of 9.9 percent during the past two years. Housing sales increased by 88.5 percent year on year, registering average growth of 19.1 percent during the past two years. In Q1, investments in real estate development grew by 25.6 percent year on year, registering average growth of 7.6 percent during the past two years. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 28.8 percent year on year, registering average growth of 9.3 percent during the past two years and accounting for 74.8 percent of total investments in real estate development.Growth of real estate loans on the whole remained stable. At end-March, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 10.9 percent year on year to RMB50.0 trillion, a deceleration of 0.6 percentage point from end-2020. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 14.5 percent year on year to RMB35.7 trillion, a deceleration of 0.1 percentage point from end-2020. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 5.8 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion, a deceleration of 2.4 percentage points from end-2020. 6.2 The electricity sector was is transitioning to achieve the targets of peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality In 2020, having overcome the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and the serious domestic and international situations, the electricity sector managed to provide reliable electricity guarantees for pandemic containment and resumption of work and production. Supply and demand for electricity was on the whole balanced, except for short supplies at peak times in some regions. Since the beginning of 2021, electricity production rebounded rapidly, and demand for electricity was strong, mainly due to cold spells and that people were staying put for the Spring Festival. In Q1 2021, electricity generated by power plants above a designated size grew by 19 percent year on year to 1.9051 trillion kWh, registering average growth of 5.3 percent over the past two years. Total electricity consumption grew by 21.2 percent year on year. Specifically, electricity consumed by the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 26.4 percent, 24.1 percent, and 28.2 percent year on year respectively, and electricity consumed by residents in urban and rural areas grew by 4.7 percent year onyear. In September 2020, General Secretary Xi Jinping delivered a speech at the general debate of the 75th Session of the United Nations General Assembly, announcing that China will scale up its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions and achieve a carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060. In recent years, the electricity sector has witnessed remarkable achievements in the transition to low carbon and green development. The structure for electricity generation has been continuously improved, and a relatively complete industrial system of renewable energy technologies has been put into place. To be specific, the hydropower sector boasts independent design and manufacturing capability of the largest million kW-level hydraulic turbine in the world; its technology for low-speed wind power ranks in the forefront of the world; the photovoltaic industry takes the lead in the world with its industrial competitiveness continuously on the rise. At end-2020, the installed capacity of China’s renewable energy totaled 930 million kW, accounting for 42.4 percent of Gross Installed Capacity (GIC), up 14.6 percentage points from end-2012. The share of installed capacity of coal-fired power in GIC dropped to 49.1 percent, and clean power accounted for over 70 percent of newly installed capacities in 2020. Grid-connected wind and solar power generation grew rapidly by 15.1 percent and 16.6 percent year on year to 466.5 billion and 261.1 billion kWh respectively in 2020. It should also be noted that most of China’s power is thermal power. Although the share of installed capacity of coal-fired power in GIC has been cut to below 50 percent, the share of coal-fired power generation in total power generation is as high as about 65 percent. Therefore, there is still a long way to go to shift the power generating structure. In the meantime, the electricity sector faces technological bottlenecks such as the power generation and conservation of renewable energies as well as the flexibility of grid system, and intermittent and fluctuating wind power and photovoltaic consumption problems are becoming more prominent. To meet the target of achieving carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060, while ensuring power safety and supply, it is necessary to construct a new type of electricity system mainly composed of new energies. An institutional mechanism and policy system that are conducive to the joint development and utilization of renewable energy by the whole society should be improved. In terms of power production, China should take action to upgrade energy conservation and emission cuts of coal-fired power so as to achieve peak thermal power generation as soon as possible. Action should be taken to optimize the layout of new energy development, to encourage the local development and utilization of newenergy, to gradually realize clean replacement of photovoltaic, wind power, hydropower, etc., and to gradually form a key technology system of new power systems with China’s independent intellectual property rights. In terms of power transmission, China should accelerate the smart transformation of grid infrastructure and the construction of smart microgrids; build a long-term mechanism for new energy consumption, strengthen the integration of “source, grid, load, and storage,” and enhance the ability to address idle capacities and conservation of clean energies. At the same time, China should accelerate the construction of a unified, open, competitive, and orderly power market system and a national carbon emission trading system, so as to produce effective price signals and to give full play to the decisive role of the market in the distribution of power resources. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I．Outlook for the Chinese economy Since the beginning of 2021, the Chinese economy continued recovering, reinforcing and improving steadily. In Q1, GDP saw year-on-year growth of 18.3 percent, with the growth rate averaging 5.0 percent during the past two years. The economy is off to a good start, and new achievements have been made in high-quality development. The 14th Five-Year Plan period (2021–25) will be the first five years as China embarks on a new journey to build a modern socialist country in all respects. Therefore, China’s development is still at an important phase of strategic opportunities, and the fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run remain unchanged. The growth momentum of the Chinese economy has been continuously enhanced, and there have been more positive factors in economic performance. In Q1, industrial production steadily picked up, and exports driven by rising external demand maintained fairly fast growth. Investment and consumption sustained the trend of a steady recovery, employment and the people’s well-being were secured, and market expectations were generally stable. The quality and efficiency of the financial sector in serving the real economy improved continuously, and the pace of credit supply by financial institutions was appropriate. The macro leverage ratio in Q1 was 276.8 percent, decreasing further by 2.6 percentage points after a drop of 1.6 percentage points in Q4 2020. As a result, the potential momentum to serve high-qualitydevelopment has been strengthened. Overall financial risks have tended to moderate, and the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur has been firmly defended. The RMB exchange rate has been kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and foreign exchange reserves have remained above USD3 trillion. The economy has strengthened its capacity to address external shocks. It should also be noted that as the external environment is still complex and serious, the Chinese economic recovery is imbalanced and its foundation is not solid; social and economic development still faces numerous risks and challenges. The COVID-19 pandemic is still raging around the globe with many regions witnessing a resurgence of infections recently. The global economic recovery is imbalanced and unstable, which has become increasingly apparent, and the spillover effect of the overseas accommodative monetary policies continues to be felt. Meanwhile, the rising inflation expectations in the major economies and the increasing yields of their government bonds have caused some emerging economies to face mounting pressures of currency depreciation and capital outflow as well as rising risks in debt repayments and refinancing. Domestically, the foundation for economic recovery is not yet solid as resident consumption is still constrained, investment growth lacks momentum, micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and self-employed businesses are facing many difficulties, and pressures remain concerning employment. As the contradiction between fiscal revenue and fiscal expenditures is prominent in some regions, there are still potential risks with respect to regional finance. In addition, we must not overlook medium and long-term challenges, such as an insufficient capacity for technological innovations, the extremely urgent task of green transformation and the accelerating aging of the population. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance awareness of both opportunities and risks. The PBC will focus on fulfilling its responsibilities by properly handling the relationship between reforms and macro management, short-term and long-term considerations, as well as internal and external equilibria in a bid to achieve high-quality development. Consumer prices overall are stable, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. In Q1 2021, the COVID-19 resurgence in some regions during the winter and the spring to some extent affected the recovery of consumption in the service industry. Adding the disruption of short-term factors such as the high base and the late arrival of the Spring Festival, CPI growth remained around zero and turned from negative to positive in March, posting 0.4 percent and 0.9 percent in March and in April, respectively. In the near future, the CPI will move stably and stay within areasonable range. Meanwhile, the steady recovery of domestic demand and the price hikes in commodities such as crude oil have led to rising prices of industrial products and an acceleration of year-on-year PPI growth. Adding the low-base effect, the PPI will witness a rise in 2021. When the base effect subsides and supply gradually recovers, the PPI is likely to stabilize. In the medium and long term, the Chinese economy is expected to witness stable growth. Given that aggregate supply and demand are basically in equilibrium, the monetary policy remains sound, and monetary conditions are reasonable and appropriate, there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference and will put into practice the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will adhere to the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, view things from the perspective of the new development stage, apply the new development philosophy, and foster a new development paradigm. Giving top priority to ensuring stability, the PBC will focus on what is important, defend the bottom line, and live up to its responsibilities. Meanwhile, it will attach importance to cross-cycle policy design by taking into account both immediate and long-term concerns, maintaining the continuity, stability, and sustainability of macro policies, and keeping up the necessary intensity of support for the economy. Moreover, the PBC will stabilize expectations, implement macro policies in a targeted manner, and consolidate and further the success achieved in pandemic control as well as in economic and social development so as to keep the economic indicators within a reasonable range and achieve a higher level of equilibrium in the course of recovery. With these efforts, the PBC will celebrate the centenary of the CPC with outstanding achievements. The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. It will place even higher priority on serving the real economy, cherish the space for the conduct of a normal monetary policy, and properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention. At the same time, the PBC will build a modern central banking system while improving the modern monetary policy framework and the mechanism for money supply management. It will keep liquidityadequate at a reasonable level so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be basically in line with nominal economic growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. Work will be done to further bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts as well as the monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy, to build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, and to intensify support for the real economy, key fields, and weak links. The PBC will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, improve the central bank policy rate system, optimize regulation over deposit rates, and continue to unleash the potential of reform in lowering loan rates so as to further bring down loan rates in real terms. While giving play to the decisive role of market supply and demand in the formation of exchange rates and enhancing the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, it will strengthen macro-prudential management, stabilize market expectations, and guide enterprises and financial institutions to always be risk-neutral, thereby keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and consolidating the basis of the RMB’s international credit. More efforts will be put into monitoring and analysis as well as expectation management to keep prices basically stable. With the aim of firmly defending the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and will set up a long-term mechanism for forestalling and defusing financial risks so as to safeguard and build financial security. Moreover, further steps will be taken to hold all relevant parties accountable and to replenish the capital of small- and medium-sized banks based on their conditions. First, the PBC will maintain a reasonable growth in money and credit as well as in AFRE. It will improve the mechanism for money supply management, attach importance to cross-cycle policy design, and properly control the general valve of money supply so that the growth rates of money supply and AFRE will be basically in line with nominal economic growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. Closely watching the developments of economic and financial situations at home and abroad, it will enhance monitoring and analysis of liquidity supply and demand and financial markets. It will also employ a mix of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility, open market operations, central bank lending, and central bank discounts, to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to guide market rates to move around policy rates. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for sustainable replenishment of bank capital and will step up support for small- and medium-sized banks in their issuances of capital replenishment instruments, such as perpetual bonds, so that banks will be better ableto serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Measures will be taken to improve macroeconomic governance, to optimize monetary policy objectives as well as fiscal, employment, industry, investment, consumption, environmental protection, regional and other policy objectives, and to promote a reasonable division of duties and an efficient synergy. Second, the PBC will promote effective policy implementation to bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts, and the monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy. It will keep central bank lending and central bank discount policies stable, and it will continue to provide inclusive and sustainable funding support for agro-related businesses, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and private enterprises. It will keep up the intensity of financial support for MSBs and further ramp up support for self-employed traders. The structural monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy will be used to play an effective role in targeted liquidity provision, and two monetary policy instruments directly supporting the real economy will remain in place for another extended period until the end of this year. Research is being done on the launch of a central bank support instrument for carbon emissions reduction to support eligible financial institutions providing funding at preferential interest rates to projects that will significantly reduce carbon emissions. The PBC will support green and low-carbon development in line with market-oriented principles to help reach the aims of peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. It will improve the system for providing financial support for innovation and will develop fund chains for innovation chains and industrial chains. It will improve the regional financial policy system, boost financial support for major national strategies on regional development, balance regional financial support, and promote coordinated development across regions. Financial support policies will remain generally stable to consolidate and further the achievements of poverty eradication. Moreover, work will be done to step up financial support for the modernization of agriculture and rural areas, to vigorously promote unsecured micro loans for farmers, and to intensify financial support for key fields, such as food security, development of the seed industry, and development of high-quality farmland. The PBC will push further ahead with efforts to enhance the ability of commercial banks to provide financial services and will support them to increase credit supply for the agricultural sector, rural areas, farmers, MSBs, and the manufacturing sector. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices, and expectations, and it will maintain the continuity, consistency, and stability of real estate finance policies. It will also implement rules for prudential management of real estate finance and step up financial support for the rental of housing. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system and continuing to deepen the loan prime rate (LPR) reform. In the meantime, it will unleash the potential of reform in lowering loan rates, optimize regulation over deposit rates, further bring down loan rates in real terms, and continue guiding the financial system to make interest concessions to the real economy. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and bring into play the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. It will guide social expectations and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Work will be done to accelerate development of the foreign exchange market, to guide enterprises and financial institutions to always be risk-neutral, and to provide services of exchange rate risk management for import and export companies with authentic needs. The PBC will steadily advance convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and facilitate use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment. Fifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental institution building in the financial market to serve the real economy and to guard against market risks. Institution building will be strengthened in the bond market to enhance its abilities to serve the real economy. The PBC will see that intermediary institutions fulfil their responsibilities, and it will push for the implementation of the requirements for information disclosures regarding corporate credit bonds and improve the regulations on credit ratings. The mechanism for risk prevention and resolution of bond defaults will be improved in line with market-oriented and law-based principles, while measures will be taken to crack down on debt evasion. Moreover, the PBC will improve the institutional arrangements of relevant policies to steadily open up thebond market. Continued efforts will be made to enhance fundamental institution building in the capital market so as to better protect the interests of investors and promote the stable and healthy development of the capital market. Sixth, the PBC will push further ahead with the reform of financial institutions and will continue to improve corporate governance and optimize financial supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, more work will be done to deepen the reform of large commercial banks and to establish a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. Large banks will be guided to shift the focus of their services to the primary level and increase efficiency so as to provide better services for MSBs and private enterprises. Through improvements in monetary, regulatory, and tax rules, small- and medium-sized banks and rural credit cooperatives will be encouraged to focus on their main duties and businesses and to reassume their roles in serving local needs and their original purposes, while an effective mechanism for checks and balances in governance will be established. Measures will be taken to reform and optimize development finance and policy finance, to stress their respective positioning, and to carry out category-based management of separate accounts so that they will be better able to serve national strategies and planning and to provide financial support for key fields, weak links as well as critical stages in economic and social development. Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. It will make every effort to defuse existing risks and to contain any possible resurgence of risks. In the meantime, it will further define the respective responsibilities of all concerned parties to see that they truly perform their duties and work together to resolve risks. Efforts will be intensified to write off non-performing assets in the banking system, while the capital of small- and medium-sized banks will be replenished based on their conditions. The PBC will act quickly to shore up the weaknesses in the regulatory framework, accelerate its work to improve the modern financial regulatory system, and strengthen regulatory coordination. It will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and establish a mechanism for fiscal and financial risk resolution led by major local officials so as to hold to account those responsible for major financial risks and effectively prevent moral hazards. While the role of the deposit insurance system will be effectively brought into play, attention will be focused on early rectification. More work needs to be done to improve the mechanism for professional and market-oriented risk resolution under the deposit insurance system. The PBC willwork towards financial risk prevention that is more forward-looking, broad-sighted, and preemptive so as to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis  Starting from 2021, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with  Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, following the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary  Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work  Conference, and implementing the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of  the Government, the People's Bank of China (PBC) pursued a sound monetary policy  which is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. Money, credit, and aggregate  financing to the real economy gained reasonable growth. Overall financing costs  remained stable, albeit with a slight decline. Financial support for the real economy,  key areas, and weak links was further strengthened. All this buttressed stable  performance of the economy with good momentum.  I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level  In Q2 2021, the PBC pursued a sound monetary policy that is flexible, targeted,  reasonable, and appropriate. It made scientific judgments about macroeconomic  conditions and implemented the concept of a cross-cycle design. By comprehensively  using multiple policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) and open  market operations (OMOs), to inject liquidity, and conducting these operations in a  more forward-looking, flexible, and effective manner, the PBC maintained adequate  liquidity in the banking system at a reasonable level. In the meantime, the PBC  strengthened direct communications with market entities in many ways to stabilize  market expectations, and it steadily released policy rate signals. Market interest rates  were guided to move around the OMO rates, further strengthening the stability of  interest rates. On July 15, the PBC reduced the required reserve ratio (RRR) by 0.5  percentage points, optimizing the capital structure of financial institutions through  liquidity management. The PBC proactively took into consideration factors, such as the  peak tax period, the maturity of the MLF, and the accelerated issuance of local  government bonds, and placed an emphasis on balancing demand and supply of market  funds. Thus, the short, medium, and long-term liquidity supply was kept adequate at a  reasonable level, basically in line with market demand. At end-June, the excess reserve  ratio of financial institutions registered 1.2 percent, down 0.4 percentage points from  the corresponding period of 2020.  II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the lending rates at  historically low levels  Credits provide solid support for the real economy. During the COVID-19 pandemic,  there was an increase in enterprises‚Äô demand for additional financing, which was fully  satisfied by financial institutions. This pushed up the base of financial data in H1 2020.  Despite a high base, financial data still witnessed fairly large year-on-year growth in  H1 2021, with the normal financing demands of enterprises satisfied and support for  the real economy steady. At end-June, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions  in domestic and foreign currencies grew 11.9 percent year on year to RMB191.6 trillion,  increasing RMB13.2 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and RMB500.2 billion more  than the increase during the corresponding period of 2020, respectively. Outstanding  RMB-denominated loans grew 12.3 percent year on year to RMB185.5 trillion, up  RMB12.8 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an increase that was RMB667.7  billion larger than that during the corresponding period of 2020.  With the credit structure continuously being improved, key areas and weak links, such as the manufacturing sector and micro and small businesses (MSBs), received targeted  support. At end-June, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities  grew by RMB6.6 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of  RMB1.8 trillion. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector increased  by 41.6 percent, marking the fourth consecutive month of growth over 40 percent. In  particular, the high-tech manufacturing sector witnessed a year-on-year increase of 46.3  percent. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 31 percent year on year to  RMB17.7 trillion, 18.7 percentage points higher than that of total loans during the same  period. These loans supported 38.3 million MSBs, rising 29.2 percent year on year. The weighted average interest rates on loans hit a record low. In 2021, the PBC  continued to release the potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, guided actual  lending rates to go down amidst stability, and encouraged the financial sector to cut  profits in favor of the real economy. In the meantime, the PBC optimized regulation  over deposit rates and adjusted the self-disciplinary ceiling for deposit rates, leading to  a decline in the borrowing costs of banks. In June, the one-year LPR and the over-five year LPR stood at 3.85 percent and 4.65 percent, respectively, on par with those in  December 2020. The weighted average lending rate recorded 4.93 percent in June,  sinking to a new low. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans  registered 5.20 percent, down 0.06 percentage point year on year, hitting a record low.  The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.06 percentage point year on year  to 4.58 percent, reaching historically low levels. This indicates that financial support  for the real economy continues to yield positive results.  In June, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered  67.67 percent, 8.07 percent, and 24.25 percent, respectively.  Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans declined slightly. In June, the  weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits  with maturities within 3 months registered 0.10 percent and 0.43 percent, down 0.06  and 0.16 percentage point from December 2020, respectively. The weighted average  interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with  maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.15 percent  and 0.99 percent, down 0.07 percentage points and 0.37 percentage points from  December 2020, respectively.  Deposits grew steadily. At end-June, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign  currencies in all financial institutions increased 9.5 percent year on year to RMB233.2  trillion, up RMB14.8 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an acceleration of  RMB50.1 billion. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 9.2 percent year on year to  RMB226.7 trillion, an increase of RMB14 trillion from the beginning of the year and a  deceleration of RMB506.4 billion. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at  USD1 trillion, an increase of USD129.7 billion from the beginning of 2021 and an  acceleration of USD109.1 billion. This was against the backdrop of China leading the  global economic recovery and a widened trade surplus. III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy displayed  appropriate growth  Outstanding M2 recorded RMB231.8 trillion at end-June, increasing 8.6 percent year  on year, and thus maintaining strong support for the real economy. Outstanding M1 and  M0 registered RMB63.7 trillion and RMB8.4 trillion, respectively, increasing 5.5  percent and 6.2 percent year on year. H1 2021 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB3.2  billion, which is RMB223.8 billion less than that in the same period of the previous  year.  According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real  economy (AFRE) at end-June reached over RMB300 trillion, recording RMB301.56  trillion specifically. Year-on-year growth registered 11 percent, decelerating 2.3  percentage points compared to the growth recorded at end-2020. The AFRE increment  in H1 2021 totaled RMB17.74 trillion, dropping RMB3.13 trillion year on year. It  shows the following characteristics: first, RMB-denominated loans recorded a larger  year-on-year increase. Second, trust loans and undiscounted bankers‚Äô acceptances  recorded a significantly larger year-on-year drop. Third, corporate bonds showed a  year-on-year drop in growth, while domestic equity financing of non-financial  companies exhibited a year-on-year increase. Fourth, government bonds recorded a  significantly smaller year-on-year increase. Fifth, asset-backed securities of depository  institutions showed a larger year-on-year increase. Box 1 A Proper Understanding of Money and Inflation  There are views that the relationship between money and inflation is no longer  functional because in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008, the prolonged over issuance of money in the major advanced economies did not lead to high inflation.  Consequently, central bank purchasing of assets as a way to expand money supply has  become the elixir that can spur the economy without causing high inflation. In this  respect, it is necessary to take a proper view of the difference between the quantitative  easing (QE) policies unveiled following the 2008 global financial crisis and those  policies adopted in response to the 2020 pandemic, and correctly understand the  relationship between money and inflation.  First, the QE policy that focuses on increasing base money, under which real  money growth is limited. For nearly a decade following the 2008 global financial crisis,  various factors had contributed to low inflation in the major advanced economies, such  as globalization and technological development on the supply side, the aging population,  debt overdrafts, and wealth polarization on the demand side. From a monetary  perspective, although central banks in the US, Europe, and Japan adopted QE policies  and significantly expanded their balance sheets from end-Q3 2008 to end-2017 to  increase base money, average annual growth of money supply (broad money) in these  regions were only 6.5 percent, 2.8 percent, and 2.7 percent, respectively, which roughly  matched their average nominal GDP growth of 3.1 percent, 1.8 percent, and 0.4 percent  during the same period. This is the fundamental reason that the advanced economies  did not experience a significant inflation. It should be noted that in a modern banking and credit money system, the direct money  creators are banks rather than the central bank, and QE policies, including central bank  purchases of government bonds, do not necessarily drive money growth. Base money  is different from money in that it mainly serves the purpose of reserve requirements in  the banking system and payment clearing needs. Therefore, it is money that is used in  circulation by economic entities, and it is created by banks through asset expansions,  such as bank loans. Thus, in the long term, it is money and not base money that is  closely related to inflation. After the 2008 crisis, central bank purchases of government  bonds in the US and other advanced economies led to higher excess reserves in the  banking system. But as central bank purchases mainly included existing government  bonds in the market, there were no significant monetized deficits. In addition, the  banking system was not enthusiastic about creating money through bank loans, which  kept the corresponding excess reserves within the banking system and thus did not  cause significant growth of money. From end-August 2008 before the crisis to end-  2017, the balance sheets of the central banks in the US, Europe, and Japan expanded  375 percent, 209 percent, and 375 percent, respectively, while money supply during the  same period only increased 80 percent, 30 percent, and 27 percent, far lower than the  expansion rates of the central bank balance sheets.  Second, QE policies adopted to increase money in coordination with fiscal policies,  which significantly fueled the global inflation in 2021. After the outbreak of the  pandemic in 2020, to address its impact and support an economic recovery, the major  advanced economies adopted a policy combination of an excessively loose monetary  policy and a massive fiscal stimulus, thereby driving money growth through  government-led efforts. From the perspective of the underlying mechanism: the central  bank buys government bonds and increases excess reserves, which are turned into fiscal  deposits through new issues of government bonds; fiscal deposits are then turned into  deposits of economic entities through fiscal spending of households and businesses.  The combinations of these interwoven operations cause money to grow. In 2020, the  US Fed purchased about 52 percent of newly issued Treasury bonds, and the money  supply generated from this support to fiscal spending constituted 61 percent of M2  growth in the US. As of end-2020, money supply in the US, Europe, and Japan recorded  year-on-year growth of 24.9 percent, 12.3 percent, and 7.6 percent, while nominal GDP  growth registered -2.3 percent, -5 percent, and -4 percent, respectively. Money growth  was highly inconsistent with nominal GDP growth. In terms of consumer price  movements, inflation was most serious in the US, and the gap between monetary  expansion and nominal GDP growth was also the widest. The US CPI in June reached  a 13-year high of 5.4 percent, up 4 percentage points from end-2020. Meanwhile, the  CPI in Europe and Japan were up 2.2 and 1.4 percentage points, respectively, from end-  2020. It should also be noted that government-led growth of broad money has  undesirable consequences, such as disrupting financial discipline, damaging the ability  of the banking system to create money in a market-oriented manner, and a lack of  vitality in the economy.  In general, the relationship between money and inflation is unchanged, and a massive  over-issuance of money will inevitably intensify inflation. Therefore, the key to keeping  inflation stable is to maintain sound management of money. Current inflation pressures  in China are generally contained, which can be attributed to the fact that since last May  the growth of money supply in China has been returning to its normal level at a faster  pace than that in other large economies. As of end-June 2021, M2 growth in China  registered 8.6 percent, basically equivalent to its pre-pandemic level and corresponding  to nominal economic growth, thus keeping prices stable from a macro standpoint. Next,  it is necessary that monetary policy continue to prioritize stability. A sound monetary  policy should be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. The PBC will keep the  growth of money supply and the AFRE generally in line with nominal economic growth,  and it will stick to its role as a fund provider that is separate from the fiscal authorities  so as to fundamentally ensure the overall stability of consumer prices.  IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and  equilibrium level  Since the beginning of 2021, cross-border capital flows and foreign-exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium. Market expectations have been  generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved  in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In  H1, the RMB appreciated to some extent against a basket of currencies. At end-June,  the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the  RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at  98.00 and 96.77, respectively, up 3.3 percent and 2.7 percent from end-2020. According  to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), as of end-June 2021,  the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER)  of the RMB have appreciated 2.9 percent and 0.3 percent since end-2020, and 41.7  percent and 51.9 percent since the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism  that began in 2005. The RMB appreciated against the US dollar in H1. At end-June, the  central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.4601, appreciating 1.0 percent  from end-2020 and 28.1 percent on a cumulative basis since the reform of the exchange  rate formation mechanism that began in 2005. In H1, the annualized volatility rate of  the RMB against the US dollar was 3.5 percent.  Cross-border RMB settlements in H1 totaled RMB17.6 trillion, increasing 39 percent  year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB8.9 trillion and  RMB8.6 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account  grew by 17 percent year on year to RMB3.6 trillion, among which RMB settlements of  trade in goods registered RMB2.7 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in  services and other items registered RMB952.69 billion. Cross-border RMB settlements  under the capital account posted RMB14 trillion, increasing 46 percent year on year. In Q2 2021, the PBC resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by  the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and kept the sound monetary policy  flexible and targeted, and at a reasonable and appropriate level. The PBC conducted  open market operations (OMOs) in a targeted manner, advanced the market-based  reforms of interest rates and exchange rates, further leveraged the targeted guidance  role of structural monetary policy instruments, and intensified policy support to areas  that call for long-term support, such as scientific and technological innovations, micro  and small businesses (MSBs), green development, and manufacturing, thus fostering a  favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development.  I. Conducting open market operations  Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. The PBC fully analyzed  market developments in terms of the supply and demand of funds, and conducted  successive open market operations daily to enhance operational flexibility, preciseness,  and effectiveness, to avoid both liquidity strains and excessive idle funds arising from  oversupply and to maintain liquidity within the banking system at a proper and adequate  level that was neither too tight nor loose, with the provision of medium and long-term  liquidity via monetary policy instruments such as the Medium-term Lending Facility  (MLF) as the basis. The central bank‚Äôs cross-cyclical arrangements reduced liquidity  fluctuations, stabilized market expectations, lowered the demand for precautionary  funds, and enhanced the efficiency of its liquidity operations. In late June, the PBC  properly scaled up its open market reverse repurchase operations (repos) to satisfy the  market‚Äôs short-term funding needs at the end of the six-month period and to maintain  money-market stability at the end of the first half-year.  Guiding market rates to move around central bank policy rates. In Q2 2021, both  the rates paid on the MLF and the reverse repos remained unchanged. Meanwhile, the  PBC sent short-term policy rate signals through daily operations of 7-day reverse repos,  and guided money-market rates to move around the OMO rates. As a result, the  fluctuation of interest rates declined further, market expectations became more stable,  and OMO rates played a strengthened role as the pivotal short-term rates. In Q2 2021,  the weighted average rate on 7-day repos between depository institutions in the  interbank market (DR007) averaged 2.16 percent, close to the central bank‚Äôs 7-day  reverse repo rate. The money-market rates at end-Q2 remained stable, and the  deviations from the OMO rates sharply narrowed compared to those in previous years.  Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q2 2021, the  PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15  billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent.  Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a  monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in  the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of  perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized  banks.  Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q2 2021, the PBC  issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling  RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10  billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. In H1 2021, the issuance of  six batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills totaled RMB60 billion, which  enriched the RMB investment products and the RMB liquidity management tools in the  Hong Kong market, propelled both domestic and overseas market entities to issue  RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market, and  helped promote the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market.  In H1 2021, offshore RMB bond issuances, excluding RMB-denominated central bank  bills issued in Hong Kong, registered roughly RMB100 billion, a year-on-year increase  of 80 percent. Moreover, the RMB offshore market saw increasingly brisker  transactions Box 2 The Management of Monetary Policy Expectations Attained Notable  Achievements  Developing a mechanism for the management of monetary policy expectations is an  important step to improve a modern monetary policy framework. The increasingly rule based and transparent monetary policy operations as well as the establishment of an  institutionalized monetary policy communications mechanism facilitate effective  management and guidance of public expectations, and they boost the consistency  between market entities and policy goals, thereby stabilizing the macro economy. The  14th Five-year Plan for Economic and Social Development and the Long-range  Objectives through the Year 2035 sets out to improve the formulation and  implementation mechanism for macro policies and to attach importance to the  management and guidance of expectations. In recent years, when formulating and  implementing monetary policies, the PBC has continued to improve expectation  management and it has developed a scientific and effective mechanism for the  management and guidance of monetary policy expectations, thus enhancing the central  bank‚Äôs transparency and accountability.  Enhancing a modern monetary policy framework and elevating monetary policy  transparency. Under a modern monetary policy framework, the PBC clarified its  intermediary target that the growth of money supply and of aggregate financing to the  real economy (AFRE) roughly matched nominal economic growth, clarifying how  monetary policy objectives should be anchored. The PBC improved the policy rates  system with open market operation (OMO) rates and the MLF rates serving as short  and medium-term policy rates respectively and it targeted these two rates in operations,  enabling institutions and the public to observe the monetary policy orientation. The  PBC deepened the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and improved the formation and  transmission mechanism of market-based rates from policy rates to the LPR and to  lending rates, which significantly enhanced policy transmission efficiency and greatly  improved the central bank‚Äôs efficiency in information transmission.  Improving the regular monetary policy communication mechanism and fostering stable  market expectations. The PBC gradually fixed the frequency of expectations  management as it conducted successive daily open market operations and MLF  operations at a fixed time in the middle of each month with the release of operation  arrangements in advance to stabilize market expectations; the PBC illustrated its  monetary policy stance and released monetary policy signals in each of the 12 months,  as in each quarter it held a press briefing on financial statistics in the first month,  released the China Monetary Policy Report in the second month, and held a quarterly  meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee and released an announcement in the third  month; the PBC held working conferences early and mid-year and issued press releases;  the PBC released the Annual Report of the PBC and the Report of China‚Äôs Regional  Financial Development annually to objectively reflect the effects of its monetary  policies.  Diversifying the methods used in monetary policy communications and effectively  enhancing the efficiency of communications with the public. The PBC responded to  market concerns through a wide range of methods, including attending  regular State Council policy briefings and press conferences of the State Council  Information Office, releasing answers to press questions regarding certain policies and  the transcripts of press conferences (briefings), participating in interviews with  domestic and foreign media, and publishing signed articles; the PBC reported its  judgments about the economic and financial situation and about future targeted  approaches to the Financial and Economic Affairs Committee of the National People‚Äôs  Congress (NPC) and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC),  and held consultative meetings with financial experts and industry associations to  introduce the work concerning monetary policies, to exchange ideas, and to establish a  two-way interaction mechanism; the PBC effectively leveraged the combined strength  of its new media matrix, including its WeChat account and Weibo and its Chinese and  English websites, to create a diversified three-dimensional system for expectations  management and guidance.  The effective management of monetary policy expectations primarily lies in the PBC  ‚Äúpracticing what it preaches.‚Äù The mutual verification and coordination between the  PBC‚Äôs policy operations and external communications reinforces the accountability of  monetary policies. In terms of liquidity expectations from the market, the PBC guided  financial institutions to focus on the level of interest rates instead of focusing too much  on the amount of liquidity, and the central bank conducts OMOs each day to send short term policy rate signals. Since the beginning of 2021, the liquidity and money-market  rates have remained stable, with no large fluctuations at the end of each month and at  the end of each quarter, and the deviation of the DR007 in relation to the OMO rates on  the 7-day reverse repos remained low compared with the same period in recent years,  thus providing a stable environment for liquidity management by financial institutions  and for stabilizing market expectations. Stable market expectations further reduced  precautionary liquidity demands and enhanced liquidity stability.  On balance, the management of monetary policy expectations scored notable  achievements as the monetary policy framework was more open and straightforward,  monetary policy operations became more rule-based and transparent, monetary policy  communications were more regular and institutionalized, the efficiency of  communications between the PBC and the public improved significantly, and the  efficiency of monetary policy transmissions was enhanced. In the next stage, the PBC  will continue to uphold the people-centered philosophy of governance, focus on  enhancing the transparency of the monetary policy framework, maintain the efficiency  and fairness of expectations management, further improve equity in access to  information by the public, and bolster the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission  and the accountability of the central bank.  II. Timely conducting Standing Lending Facility and Medium-term Lending  Facility operations  Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. To ensure an appropriate supply of  medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions  of the medium-term policy rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1.25 trillion of  MLF operations in H1, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.95  percent. The MLF operations conducted in Q2 totaled RMB450 billion. At end-June,  the outstanding MLF registered RMB5.40 trillion, RMB250 billion more than that at  the beginning of 2021.  Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner.  The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was  met in the full amount. In H1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB59.1 billion in SLF  operations, of which operations in Q2 registered RMB11.6 billion and the balance of  such operations at end-June posted RMB8.6 billion. The SLF rate played its role as the  ceiling of the interest rate corridor, and it safeguarded the smooth operation of the  money market. At end-June, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 3.05  percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively, on par with the rates at the end of  the previous quarter. In May 2021, the PBC issued the Notice on Issues Concerning  Improvements in SLF Management (YinFa No.135 [2021]) to strengthen SLF  management. The efficiency of SLF operations improved through a systemic  transformation that enabled small and medium financial institutions to borrow SLF in  the form delivery versus payment (DVP).  .  III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions  The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was raised for financial institutions  and foreign exchange liquidity management of financial institutions was enhanced.  The PBC decided to raise the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by two percentage  points, from 5 percent to 7 percent, effective on June 15, 2021, soaking up foreign  exchange liquidity in the amount of over USD 20 billion.  The required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered by 0.5 percentage  points in an attempt to support the real economy and ensure that costs of overall  financing drop steadily. The PBC decided to reduce the required reserve ratio by 0.5  percentage point, effective on July 15 (not applicable to financial institutions that had  already carried a required reserve ratio of 5 percent), releasing about RMB 1 trillion of  long-term funds. After this round of RRR cuts, the weighted average required reserve  ratio for financial institutions stood at 8.9 percent. This RRR reduction is a conventional  operation following normalization of monetary policies, aimed at improving the  funding structure of financial institutions and enhancing their capability to allocate  funds. First, by keeping adequate liquidity at a reasonable level, the PBC created a  favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality development and  supply-side structural reform. Second, by optimizing the financing structure of financial  institutions, the PBC effectively expanded the sources of long-term stable funding for  financial institutions to support the real economy and guided these institutions to  actively use the funds released from the RRR reduction to boost support for MSBs.  Third, the RRR reduction lowered the funding costs of financial institutions by  approximately RMB13 billion per year, which further reduced overall social financing  costs through the transmission of financial institutions.  IV. Further improving the macro-prudential management framework  The role of the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into  play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural  reform of the financial sector. In H1 2021, in line with the requirements for the key  tasks set at the Central Economic Work Conference, the PBC further improved the  MPA and attached more importance to the assessment requirements to support key  areas and weak links. It dynamically adjusted the relevant assessment indicators in an  attempt to guide financial institutions to step up support to provide medium and long term financing to inclusive MSBs and the manufacturing sector.  The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was  improved. In order to implement the requirements established by the Guiding Opinions  on Improving Supervision of Systemically Important Financial Institutions, the PBC  issued supporting regulations in line with the Measures for Assessments of Systemically  Important Banks (SIBs). The PBC, jointly with the CBIRC, drafted the Additional  Regulatory Rules for Systemically Important Banks (Trial) (Exposure Draft)  (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), and solicited public opinion starting from April 2.  The Rules specify additional regulatory requirements on SIBs in terms of an indicator  system, recovery and resolution schemes, and prudential regulatory measures, and they urge the SIBs to reduce systemic risks and to enhance their resilience and bail-in  capabilities.  V. Actively leveraging the role of structural monetary policy instruments  The PBC actively used central bank lending to support rural development, central  bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, and other tools to guide financial  institutions to step up support for areas such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture,  rural areas, and rural people as well as for poverty alleviation. The role of central  bank lending was further brought into play to provide targeted liquidity and to serve as  positive incentives. Central bank lending to support rural development and central bank  lending for MSBs was used to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to  expand the supply of credit for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty  alleviation was rolled over according to the current regulations so as to underpin and  consolidate the achievements of poverty eradication. Coordinated development of the  regional economy and finance was promoted with a newly added quota of RMB200  billion of central bank lending to ten provinces with slow credit growth. Locally  incorporated financial institutions were guided to step up policy support for areas such  as agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private enterprises in these ten provinces. As of  end-June, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development stood at  RMB465.3 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty  alleviation posted RMB888.2 billion and RMB201.4 billion, respectively. Outstanding  central bank discounts registered RMB592.2 billion. In H1, the PBC made net  withdrawals of PSLs in the amount of RMB142.4 billion from development and policy  banks, with net withdrawals in Q2 totaling RMB101.4 billion and the outstanding PSLs  registering RMB3.0926 trillion at end-June.  Targeted Medium-term Lending Facility (TMLF) operations maturing in Q2 were  rolled over in the form of MLFs. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding  source for financial institutions to expand their credit supply to MSBs and private firms  with preferential interest rates. On April 15, the PBC conducted one-year MLF  operations totaling RMB150 billion, with a rate of 2.95 percent, including the rollover  of TMLFs maturing in April. At end-June, the TMLFs maturing in Q2 were rolled over  in the form of MLFs, with the outstanding TMLFs posting zero.  Highlighting the characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary policy  instruments that directly support the real economy were continuously promoted,  with the aim of bolstering the development of MSMEs. From the introduction of the  policy in June 2020 to end-June 2021, operations of instruments supporting deferred  repayments of inclusive MSB loans were conducted on a monthly basis and provided a  total of RMB14.5 billion in incentive funds to local corporate banks to support  extensions of repayments of the principal of inclusive small and micro enterprise loans.  A total of RMB1.4478 trillion was used to alleviate the pressures on small and micro  enterprises to repay the principal and interest in stages. The support plan for inclusive  unsecured MSB loans operated on a quarterly basis. Cumulative preferential funding of  RMB221.5 billion was used to provide support for the issuance RMB620.4 billion of  unsecured loans to MSBs, thereby effectively alleviating their difficulties to access  financing. From the beginning of 2020 to June 2021, banking institutions nationwide  deferred RMB11.8 trillion of principal and interest repayments totaling RMB11.8  trillion and issued cumulative inclusive unsecured MSB loans totaling RMB6.9 trillion.  In line with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State  Council, the PBC promoted the launch of instruments in support of carbon  emissions reductions. According to the requirements set forth in the Report on the  Work of the Government and the decisions of the executive meeting of the State Council,  the PBC launched a structural monetary policy instrument supporting carbon emissions  reductions. Through the provision of low-cost funds for eligible financial institutions,  the PBC supported financial institutions by providing funding at preferential interest  rates to key projects that will significantly reduce carbon emissions. As a structural  monetary policy instrument providing direct support for the real economy, the PBC  supported developments in areas of clean energy, energy savings and environmental  protection, and carbon emissions reduction technology in a precise and direct manner,  and it leveraged more social funding to promote carbon emissions reduction. In line  with market-oriented, law-based, and international principles, the design of the  instrument fully exhibits openness and transparency. With such a ‚Äúfeasible, calculable,  and verifiable‚Äù design, the instrument is precise and direct. Being feasible means that  efforts are made to clearly support key areas that will significantly reduce carbon  emissions, including clean energy, energy savings and environmental protection, and  carbon emissions reduction technology. Being calculable means that financial  institutions can calculate the amount of carbon emissions reductions driven by loans,  and they can disclose the information on carbon emissions reductions, subject to social  supervision. Being verifiable means that third-party professional institutions can be  introduced to verify the authenticity of the information disclosed by financial  institutions so as guarantee their policy effects.  Box 3 The Role of Monetary Policy in Supporting Regional Coordinated  Development  At the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), it was  proposed that the principal challenge facing Chinese society has shifted to the gap  between unbalanced and inadequate development and the people‚Äôs ever-growing needs  for a better life. According to the requirements of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th  CPC Central Committee, coordinated development between urban and rural areas and  among regions should be enhanced notably during the 14th Five-Year Plan. Meanwhile,  the new development concept also places an emphasis on coordinated development. At  present, the economic downturn and financial issues are interconnected in some regions,  with a poor cycle between the economy and finance and fairly slow growth of credit.  In order to promote coordinated regional development, targeted measures that suit local  conditions need to be adopted to increase credit supply to regions with slow credit  growth, thereby helping foster a virtuous circle between the economy and finance.  The PBC attaches great importance to promoting coordinated regional  development. Multiple measures have been adopted and coordinated efforts have  been made to guide all kinds of financial institutions to enhance credit support to  regions with slow credit growth, under the precondition that risks are kept well  under control. First, policy banks are guided to remedy their weaknesses in regional  development. The three policy banks, namely, China Development Bank,  Agricultural Development Bank of China, and Export-Import Bank of China, are  required to guarantee that the proportion of new loans in certain regions to their new  loans in 2021 be no less than that in 2020, and they should strive to raise that proportion.  Second, full play should be given to the national commercial banks, especially the large  state-owned banks, to spearhead their role in credit supply. In line with market-oriented  and law-based principles, and under the precondition of sound risk control, banks are  guided to optimize their internal assessments and incentive measures and to increase  the credit supply in the relevant regions according to local conditions so as to support  coordinated regional development. The Agricultural Bank of China is required to  effectively use the preferential required reserve ratio policy granted for its Finance  Division of Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Rural People and to beef up support for  regions with slow credit growth. The proportion of new loans provided by the Finance  Division of Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Rural People to the relevant regions to all  new loans in 2021 should be higher than that in 2020. Third, local financial institutions  should be fully motivated as the central bank increased the quota of central bank lending  by RMB200 billion to the relevant regions. In addition, under the precondition of  guaranteeing the safety of central bank funds, the requirements have been properly  eased for eligible borrowers. Local financial institutions are guided to step up credit  support for weak links, such as agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private enterprises,  under the precondition of sound risk control.  A series of targeted measures have produced positive results. First, support policies  of central bank lending have been promoted in an orderly manner, achieving notable  results in leveraging the loans of locally incorporated financial institutions in certain  regions. As of end-June 2021, the PBC issued central bank lending in the amount of  RMB160 billion, accomplishing 80 percent of the total quota. In H1 2021, new loans  by locally incorporated financial institutions witnessed a notable increase in certain  regions. Second, policy banks and national commercial banks have actively  implemented policies and have stepped up support for regions with fairly slow credit  growth. The supply of credit has been enhanced to relevant regions through increasing  the allocation of credit resources, optimizing the pricing of internal fund transfers and  capital employment, and implementing differentiated internal assessments and  incentive measures.  In H1 2021, the proportion of new loans in certain regions to all new loans issued by  the three policy banks and the six large state-owned commercial banks witnessed a  year-on-year increase. It is the same case with the Finance Division of Agriculture,  Rural Areas, and Rural People of the Agricultural Bank of China. Overall, the credit  situation has obviously improved in regions with slow credit growth. In certain regions,  both the amount of new RMB loans and the proportion to new loans across the country  saw a year-on-year rise in H1 2021.  Going forward, the PBC will continue to effectively implement all measures and  constantly track and monitor the use of RMB200 billion of central bank lending. Further  support will be given to such provinces by the rapid issuance of central bank lending, a  high ratio of utilization, and active introduction of corresponding measures by the local  governments in an attempt to give full play to the leveraging role of central bank lending.  Various kinds of financial institutions will be guided to continuously enhance credit  support for regions with slow credit growth. Efforts will be made to accelerate  improvements in the financial environment, to smooth the virtuous circle between the  economy and finance, and to guide the shift toward positive expectations, so as to create  a favorable environment for achieving high-quality development in certain regions.  VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy to guide structural reform  Financial support to keep businesses and employment stable was enhanced. The  Notice on Promoting the Project of Enhancing the Capacity to Provide Financial  Services for Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises (Yinfa No. 176 [2021]) was  issued, which established detailed requirements for improving the capacity to provide  financial services for MSMEs and strengthened the building of a long-term mechanism  for ‚Äúlending with confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism.‚Äù A dedicated  project with the theme of ‚ÄúLending to Support Small Businesses for Serving the General  Public‚Äôs Livelihood‚Äù was launched in a bid to boost financial support for self-employed  businesses and to further improve financial services. At end-June 2021, outstanding  inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 31 percent year on year to RMB17.7 trillion. These  loans supported 38.30 million MSBs, an increase of 29.2 percent year on year.  Effective support was provided to consolidate and expand the achievements of  poverty eradication and to comprehensively promote rural revitalization. The PBC,  jointly with five other departments, released the Opinions on Financial Support for  Consolidating Achievements in the Critical Battle against Poverty and  Comprehensively Promoting Rural Revitalization (Yinfa No. 171 [2021]), which  adjusted and optimized financial support policies. It clarified priorities and key  measures in terms of effectively linking up the consolidation and expansion of poverty  eradication achievements with rural revitalization, optimized  the comprehensive system of financial organizations in rural areas, integrated and  improved financial products for rural development, and expanded direct financing  channels for agro-related areas. The PBC rolled out appraisal and assessment measures  on financial institutions‚Äô services for rural revitalization in an attempt to enhance  incentive and constraint effects as well as to guide financial institutions to continuously  enhance their financial resource inputs in support of rural revitalization. At end-June  2021, outstanding agro-related loans increased 10.1 percent year on year to RMB41.66  trillion.  Financial support for key areas such as new types of agribusinesses was enhanced  remarkably. The PBC took the lead in issuing the Opinions on Extending Financial  Support for the Development of New Types of Agribusinesses (Yinfa No.133 [2021]).  It guided financial institutions to continuously boost the availability, coverage, and facility of financial services for new types of agribusinesses, promoted the integrated  development of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in rural areas, and enhanced  the quality, economic performance, and competitiveness of agriculture.  Financial support for key areas such as sci-tech innovations and the  manufacturing sector was strengthened. The PBC made efforts to enhance and  improve financial support for sci-tech innovations, to meet the effective financing  demands of core enterprises aimed at seeking key technology breakthroughs, and to  boost the availability of financing for tech-SMEs. Financial institutions were guided to  increase the supply of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector so as  to promote its high-quality development. At end-June 2021, outstanding medium and  long-term loans to the manufacturing sector soared by 41.6 percent year on year, the  growth of which stood above 40 percent for four consecutive months. In particular,  growth of the high-tech manufacturing sector witnessed a year-on-year increase of 46.3  percent.  Financial support for green development was intensified. A symposium was held  on adjusting the credit structure of major nationwide banks. Financial institutions were  guided to increase their support for green and low-carbon industries. With the aim of  achieving the strategic goals of a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality, the PBC  introduced carbon neutrality-related special financial bonds and carbon neutrality related debt financing instruments on the interbank market so as to support projects  with significant effects on carbon emissions reductions. Based on market-oriented  principles, commercial banks were guided to provide reasonable and necessary support  for the transformation and upgrading of coal and other traditional energy industries.  VII. Further deepening the market-based interest rate reform  Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC further deepened the market-based interest-rate  reform, continuously unleashed the potential of the reform in reducing loan interest  rates, and optimized regulation of deposit interest rates, pushing actual loan rates further  downward. First, with continued progress in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and  application of the LPR, the financing costs of enterprises witnessed a further decline.  Second, regulation of deposit rates was improved. After modification, the self disciplined ceiling of deposit rates will be determined by adding basis points to the  benchmark interest rates; this was formally put into practice on June 21. Third, order  in the credit market was regulated. Lenders of all sorts were promoted to explicitly  indicate the annualized interest rates of their loan products so as to effectively protect  the rights of financial consumers to be informed. Fourth, the PBC promoted a shift in  the pricing benchmark for USD floating-rate loans by financial institutions and it  guided the market self-discipline mechanism for interest rates to study and issue the  recommended agreement format for domestic USD floating-rate loans. Starting from  June 1, financial institutions can sign contracts for USD floating-rate loans with  reference to the format or they can make adaptive adjustments to the recommended  format based on actual conditions.  Box 4 Actual Loan Interest Rates were Generally Stable with a Decline  Since the beginning of 2021, the sound monetary policy has maintained stability as its  top priority, reflecting its feature of being forward-looking, targeted, and effective. With  the benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously unleashed, the PBC  improved regulations over deposit rates, promoted explicit indications of annualized  loan rates, safeguarded the sound competitive order in the market, and guided actual  loan rates to remain generally stable with a decline, compared with the historical lowest  level of 2020.  The PBC promoted financial institutions to improve application of the LPR  pricing mechanism and continuously released the potential of the LPR reform.  Banks were guided to incorporate the LPR into their internal funds transfer pricing (FTP)  so as to strengthen the benchmark role of the LPR in their internal and external pricing.  Up until now, all nationwide financial institutions have established relevant rules and  systems of FTP and have continuously improved their loan FTP mechanisms pegged to  the LPR, through which movement of the LPR may be promptly transferred to loan  rates. Locally incorporated financial institutions continuously improved establishment  of the FTP mechanism, with 63 percent of these institutions setting up internal FTP  management systems, 14 percentage points more than before the LPR reform.  Regulations over deposit rates were improved, with bank liability costs basically  stable. On June 21, 2021, the self-disciplinary mechanism for setting interest rates  optimized determination of the self-disciplinary ceiling for deposit interest rates, which  had shifted from multiplying the benchmark deposit rates by a designated multiplier to  adding basis points to the benchmark interest rates. This modification has not only  safeguarded financial institutions‚Äô right of independent pricing but it has also  contributed to orderly market competition. Deposits are guided to return to an  appropriate maturity structure, and the liability costs of banks have stabilized. Currently,  all financial institutions have put in place the relevant requirements of the self disciplinary mechanism for setting interest rates, and the new self-disciplinary ceiling  of interest rates has been implemented in a stable and orderly manner. In terms of  quoted interest rates, they remain basically unchanged for nationwide banks, while  some have been adjusted downwards for medium and long-term deposits by some local  financial institutions that still meet the requirements for the new self-disciplinary  ceiling of interest rates. In practice, within the self-disciplinary ceiling, banks may  independently negotiate with the depositors so as to determine their respective deposit  interest rates.  Explicit indications of annualized loan rates were promoted to safeguard the vital  interests of financial consumers. On March 31, 2021, the PBC issued Announcement  No. 3 [2021], requiring all institutions conducting lending businesses to explicitly  indicate their annualized loan rates, and it specified the calculation methodology.  Meanwhile, the PBC directed the National Internet Finance Association of China to  study the incorporation of annualized loan rates into national standards as mandatory  disclosure requirements. By end-June, 2021, banking institutions had all explicitly  indicated their annualized loan rates, and over 6,000 lending institutions as well as  major internet financial platforms had basically completed this task. In general, explicit  indications of annualized loan rates help borrowers understand actual borrowing costs  and they effectively safeguard the right of financial consumers to be informed.  Actual loan interest rates were generally stable with a decline. Currently, the  Chinese economy has improved steadily with sound momentum, and its growth rate  has basically returned to its potential level. Financial support for the real economy is  strong and solid, and the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE are basically in  line with nominal economic growth. This demonstrates that from a macro perspective,  interest rates remain at a reasonable level in China, which provides a favorable interest rate environment for steady economic operations and high-quality development. In H1  2021, the weighted average rate on loans registered 5.07 percent, down 0.07 percentage  points year on year and 0.08 percentage point compared with that of 2020, respectively.  In particular, interest rates on corporate loans witnessed a greater drop. In H1 2021, the  weighted average rate on corporate loans fell by 0.16 percentage points year on year to  4.63 percent, down 0.09 percentage points compared with that in 2020. The financing  costs of the real economy remained generally stable, albeit with a decline. In an  international comparison, although they were slightly higher than those in the major  advanced economies, the interest rates in China remain relatively low among the  developing countries and the emerging economies. In addition, from the perspective of  the actual interest rates for corporate lending, they are generally on par with the major  commercial banks of China and the US. In Q1 2021, the average corporate lending rate  of the four major commercial banks in the US (Citibank, Bank of America, Wells Fargo,  and JP Morgan) registered 4.03 percent, which was 4.04 percent of the four major  commercial banks in China (the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the  Agricultural Bank of China, Bank of China, and China Construction Bank).  Going forward, the PBC will perfect the market-oriented interest-rate formation and  transmission mechanism and improve the policy rate system of the central bank. It will  continue to unleash the potential of the LPR reform, smooth the transmission channels  for loan interest rates, optimize the allocation structure of financial resources, and  consolidate previous achievements in the reduction of loan interest rates. Meanwhile,  the PBC will optimize regulations over deposit interest rates, keep the banks‚Äô liability  costs basically stable, and urge banks to transfer the policy benefits to the real economy  so as to further bring down the actual loan rates and to secure general stability with a  decline in the overall financing costs for MSBs.  VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism  The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and  to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and  demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It enhanced the RMB exchange rate  flexibility and gave play to the role of the exchange rate in adjusting the macro economy  and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The PBC attached  importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at  an adaptive and equilibrium level. In H1 2021, the highest and lowest RMB central  parities were 6.3572 and 6.5713, respectively, against the USD. During the 118 trading  days, the RMB appreciated on 62 days and depreciated on 56 days. The biggest intraday  appreciation and depreciation were 1.0 percent (648 bps) and 0.8 percent (543 bps),  respectively. The RMB exchange rates against the other major international currencies  floated in two ways. At end-June, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the  euro, and the Japanese yen appreciated 1.0 percent, 4.4 percent, and 8.2 percent,  respectively, from end-2020, while the RMB central parity against the pound had  depreciated 0.6 percent during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange  rate formation mechanism commenced in 2005, the RMB had appreciated by a  cumulative total of 28.1 percent, 30.3 percent, and 25 percent, respectively, against the  dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen by the end of June 2021. Direct RMB trading was  buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped  lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and  investment.  As of end-June, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and  foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of  RMB60.461 billion, and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD475  million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and  investment. Box 5 A Norm of Two-way Fluctuations of the RMB Exchange Rate  In recent years, with the continuous progress in the reform of the RMB exchange rate  formation mechanism, the market has played a decisive role in the formation of the  exchange rate. The RMB exchange rate fluctuates in two ways, both upward and  downward, and the exchange rate flexibility is increasing, creating conditions for  independent implementation of a normal monetary policy.  The current managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and  demand with reference to a basket of currencies is suitable for China‚Äôs conditions  and should be maintained for a long time, which is the basis for the two-way  fluctuations in the RMB exchange rate. A mix of measures adopted by the PBC  work as an integral whole so that the two-way fluctuations of the RMB exchange  rate have become a norm, and the RMB exchange rate is kept basically stable at  an adaptive and equilibrium level. First, the market plays a decisive role in the  formation of the exchange rate. The PBC has withdrawn from regular intervention in  the foreign exchange market. The exchange rate, determined by market supply and  demand, plays the role of a price signal, which improves the efficiency of resource  allocations. Second, the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has  been deepened. In October 2020, the counter cyclical factor faded out of the quotation  model of the RMB central parity against the USD. After the adjustment, the central  parity formation mechanism has become more transparent, benchmarking, and effective,  which also reflects that the market has been given full play in the self-discipline  mechanism of the foreign exchange market. Third, the macro-prudential management  framework for cross-border financing has been improved. Since 2020, in line with  macroeconomic conditions and the balance of payments, the PBC has adjusted the  macro-prudential parameter for cross-border financing of financial institutions and  enterprises and has expanded coverage of the macro-prudential management  framework for cross-border financing. Apart from raising management efficiency, the  PBC has also implemented differentiated policies according to the size of the financial  institutions, ensured the reasonable and orderly succession of policies, and guided  financial institutions to adjust the structure of their assets and liabilities in a market oriented manner. Fourth, expectation management has been emphasized. In the case of  large swings in the RMB exchange rate and market expectations, the PBC responded  actively to market concerns and communicated policy intentions with the market  through various channels so as to curb the overshooting of the foreign exchange market  and to safeguard the market‚Äôs sound operation. Fifth, liquidity in the foreign exchange  market has been adjusted effectively. On May 31, 2021, the PBC announced to raise  the reserve ratio for foreign exchange deposits of financial institutions by 2 percentage  points, from 5 percent to 7 percent. The adjustment was aimed at pumping out part of  the market liquidity and offsetting the impact of the external environment on the  domestic market. Sixth, enterprises and financial institutions have been guided to  establish the concept of ‚Äúrisk neutrality.‚Äù The PBC has guided financial institutions to  provide foreign exchange risk management services to enterprises in line with the  principle that foreign exchange management is based on real needs and should stick to  risk neutrality. Financial institutions have also been guided to maintain sound  operations in a bid to foster the stable and healthy development of the foreign exchange  market.  Beginning from 2020, the two-way fluctuations in the RMB exchange rate have  also reflected the differences in economic cycle and monetary policies at home and  abroad. In the midst of globalization, the economy and finance of various economies  are interacting with one another. The pandemic containment and economic recovery  have been advancing at different paces, and different monetary policies have been  adopted worldwide. The two-way fluctuation of the RMB exchange rate reflects that  the domestic and external economic cycles and monetary policies do not match one  another. In 2020, faced with the global economic impact of COVID-19, China stepped  up its macro-policy response and the PBC kept its sound monetary policy flexible,  appropriate, and targeted, all of which buttressed China‚Äôs leading role in pandemic  containment, resumption of work and production, and attainment of positive economic  growth. China‚Äôs monetary policy started to turn around to normal in May 2020, when  the pandemic was increasingly rampant elsewhere and ultra-loose monetary policies  were being adopted by the major economies. As a result, the RMB appreciated against  the USD and a basket of currencies. In 2020, the RMB central parity appreciated against  the USD by 6.9 percent, less than that of the euro, and the CEFTS index rose by 3.8  percent. Since the beginning of 2021, the COVID-19 vaccination has been making  progress in the developed economies, and reflation trade has been on the rise in the  market. The international financial market has been concerned that the US Fed may  reduce its quantitative easing and raise interest rates in advance. In June, the USD  appreciated against the major currencies, while China insisted on implementing its  normal monetary policies, with its economy operating near its potential growth rate.  The RMB depreciated by 1.4 percent against the USD in the same month, while the  CFETS index remained stable.  On the whole, the two-way fluctuation of the RMB exchange rate results from the  changes in domestic and external economic conditions, the balance of payments, and  the foreign exchange markets both at home and abroad. It reasonably reflects changes  in supply and demand in the foreign exchange market. It plays a role in adjusting the  macro economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments, promotes  both internal and external equilibria, and helps expand the space for implementation of  an independent monetary policy. In the future, it will continue to be a norm for the RMB  exchange rate to fluctuate in two ways, and the RMB may either appreciate or  depreciate, which cannot be accurately predicted by any single person. Going forward,  the PBC will maintain the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market  supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It will appropriately  employ multiple monetary policy tools, enhance macro-prudential management of  cross-border financing, reasonably guide expectations through various means, and help  enterprises and financial institutions establish the concept of ‚Äúrisk neutrality‚Äù so as to  keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.  IX. Promoting reform of financial institutions and resolution of financial risks in  a prudent and orderly manner  Risk resolution and reform and restructuring of small and medium-sized financial  institutions have been promoted in an orderly manner. Since the takeover of the  Baoshang Bank (BSB), there has been steady progress in various relevant tasks,  breaking the rigid payments in an orderly manner, and completing liquidation and asset  verification on schedule. On January 12, 2021, Beijing No.1 Intermediate People‚Äôs  Court held a creditors‚Äô meeting for the first time, and the administrator completed a  review of the claims of 743 creditors. On February 7, Beijing No.1 Intermediate  People‚Äôs Court issued its ruling on the BSB‚Äôs bankruptcy. Equities of former  shareholders were cleared, and large creditors bore partial losses. Risk resolution of the  BSB was basically completed, and the follow-up work was advanced in a steady and  orderly manner. Moreover, the reform and restructuring plan of Hengfeng Bank was  carried out smoothly, and the risk resolution, reform, and restructuring of Jinzhou Bank  was basically completed so as to ensure the sound operation of the financial system and  to firmly defend the bottom line so that no systemic risk should occur.  The reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously  deepened. The PBC advanced comprehensive reform plans for development and policy  financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scope, implement  classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms,  and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial  institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full  play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development  on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control.  X. Deepening reform of foreign exchange arrangements  Continue to strengthen positive incentives for trade facilitation pilot programs.  Persist in high standards when verifying the pilot conditions. Coverage of the  program was expanded in a steady and orderly manner and the pilot program was  further optimized. As of end-June 2021, the pilot program had been expanded to  incorporate 22 areas, 99 banks, and 909 enterprises.  New ideas for international trade management were explored. Based on the pilot  work in Hainan and other places regarding new international trade patterns, the PBC  has supported Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and other regions with actual needs to develop new  offshore international trade and it has guided banks to improve their capability to verify  compliance so as to facilitate real and legitimate business activities.  Two-way individual foreign exchange business was facilitated. The State  Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) issued the Notice on Further Promoting  Facilitation of Individual Foreign Exchange Business under the Current Account  (Huifa [2021] 13), aiming to improve the banks‚Äô capability to handle complex  individual current-account businesses. The SAFE also issued the Individual Foreign  Exchange Business Manual (First Edition) so as to popularize knowledge about  individual foreign exchange policies. Moreover, the SAFE guided its Guangdong and  Shenzhen branches to launch pilot programs to facilitate cross-border insurance  exchange under the current account and to promote the interconnectivity of insurance  markets in Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macau.  Stable and sound operation of the foreign exchange market was maintained. The  PBC enhanced the timeliness and accuracy of off-site inspections and placed emphasis  on punishing illegal financial activities, such as underground banks and cross-border  gambling. Special investigations of key entities were conducted so as to effectively  deter foreign exchange market violations and to maintain an orderly foreign exchange  market. In H1 2021, a total of 1290 foreign exchange violations were investigated and  penalized, with total fines amounting to RMB375 million.  Part 3. Financial Market Conditions  In H1 2021, the financial market generally operated smoothly and steadily. Money  market interest rates remained stable with active market transactions. The bond market  featured generally declining bond coupon rates, increased bond issuances, and  decreased cash bond transactions. The stock market index rose, and both turnover and  the amount of funds raised witnessed year-on-year increases.  I. Financial market overview  1. Money market interest rates remained stable, and the growth of market  transactions slowed down  Money market interest rates were generally stable. In June, the monthly weighted  average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.17 percent, 16 basis points higher than  that in March. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond  repos among depository institutions posted 2.04 percent, 13 basis points lower than the  monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. In June, the monthly weighted  average interest rate for interbank lending posted 2.13 percent. At end-March, the  overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.18 percent and 2.41 percent, respectively.  Market transactions remain active. In H1 2021, the volume of bond repos trading on  the interbank market reached RMB471.4 trillion, representing an average daily turnover  of RMB3.9 trillion and almost on par with that in the previous year. The volume of  cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB58.1 trillion, with an average  daily turnover of RMB476.1 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 26.6 percent. In  terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 83.6 percent of the total  turnover in bond repos, decreasing 1.2 percentage points year on year, and overnight  lending made up 89.2 percent of interbank lending, down 1.4 percentage points year on  year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 21.6 percent  year on year to RMB156.2 trillion. Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses witnessed orderly  development. In H1 2021, 15,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market,  raising RMB10.9 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled  RMB70.8 trillion. At end-June, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB12.4 trillion.  In H1 2021, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.70  percent, 8 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 33,000  negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions in H1 2021, raising RMB6.2  trillion, with an increase of RMB200 billion year on year.  The turnover of interest rate swaps was stable. In H1 2021, the RMB interest rate swap  market witnessed 142,000 transactions, decreasing 1.9 percent year on year, with the  volume of the notional principal totaling RMB11.1 trillion, an increase of 12.7 percent  year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one  year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB8.0  trillion, accounting for 72.0 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing  repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the  RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 85.4 percent and 13.7 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In H1 2021, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 419 transactions, with RMB43.29 billion of the notional principal.  The loan prime rate (LPR) interest rate option business developed steadily. The LPR  interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market in March 2020, and  fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29,  2021. In H1 2021, a total of 266 interest rate option transactions were concluded,  totaling RMB46.66 billion. Specifically, 29 were interest rate swap transactions,  amounting to RMB1.52 billion of the notional principal, 237 were interest rate cap/floor  transactions, amounting to RMB45.14 billion of the notional principal, 199 were LPR  interest rate transactions, totaling RMB42.61 billion of the notional principal, and 67  were FDR interest rate transactions, amounting to RMB4.05 billion of the notional  principal.  2. Coupon rates of bonds declined while bond issuances expanded  On the whole, coupon rates of bonds declined. In June 2021, the yield on 10-year  government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 3.10 percent, 12 basis  points lower than that in March. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by  the China Development Bank (CDB) was 3.47 percent, 5 basis points lower than the  rate in March. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1)  issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.94 percent, 38 basis points higher than the rate  in March.  On the whole, government securities yields went down in H1. At end-June, yields on  1-year and 10-year government securities decreased by 4 basis points and 7 basis points  to 2.43 percent and 3.08 percent from end-2020, respectively; the spread between 1-  year and 10-year government securities was 65 basis points, down 2 basis points from  end-2020. Credit spreads narrowed at end-June, with yield spreads on 3-year AAA and  AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills and CDB bonds narrowing by 16 basis points and  40 basis points to 40 basis points and 101 basis points from end-2020, respectively.  Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In H1, the cumulative value of bond  issuances increased by 13 percent, or RMB3.4 trillion, year on year to RMB29.4 trillion,  most of which were interbank certificates of deposit, which increased by RMB3.1  trillion. At end-June, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB123.6 trillion,  an increase of 15 percent year on year.  The volume of spot bond transactions on the interbank market decreased, while the  exchange volume of spot trading continued to grow. In H1, the value of cash bonds  trading on the bond market posted RMB108.2 trillion, registering a decrease of 15.1  percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank  market was RMB96.7 trillion, representing a decrease of 19 percent year on year. The  value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB11.5 trillion, an  increase of 44 percent year on year. 3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates in the bill market were  basically stable  The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In H1, commercial drafts issued  by enterprises totaled RMB12.3 trillion, rising 5.3 percent year on year. At end-June,  outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.3 trillion, increasing by 1.0 percent year  on year. At end-June, outstanding commercial draft acceptances witnessed stable  growth, increasing by RMB250.4 billion from the beginning of this year and RMB252.9  billion from end-March, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers‚Äô acceptances, 67.9  percent were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs).  Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In H1, total  discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB23.8 trillion, growing 7.6 percent  year on year. At end-June, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.6 trillion, down 0.1  percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.6 percent of total outstanding loans,  down 0.6 percentage points year on year. In H1, the interest rates of bill financing first  increased and then decreased, but they remained generally stable.  4. Stock indices rose, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year  on year  Driven by the economic recovery, stock indices experienced a choppy rise. At end-June,  the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,591 points, increasing by  3.4 percent from end-2020. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at  15,162 points, increasing by 4.8 percent from end-2020. Turnover on the stock markets  expanded. In H1, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the  Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB107.6 trillion, and the average daily turnover  was RMB912.0 billion, representing an increase of 20 percent year on year. The amount  of funds raised on the stock markets surged significantly year on year. In H1, a  cumulative RMB657.8 billion was raised, increasing by 97 percent year on year.  5. Growth of assets in the insurance sector and premium income slowed down  In H1 2021, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB2.9 trillion,  up 5.2 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.9 percentage points from the previous  year. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB765.1 billion, representing a year-on year increase of 21.3 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit  payments increased by 15.8 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and  benefit payments went up by 26.2 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-June 2021, total  assets in the insurance sector increased 12.7 percent year on year to RMB24.8 trillion,  a deceleration of 0.6 percentage point from end-2020. Specifically, bank deposits  decreased by 2.9 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 17.7 percent year  on year.  6. Turnovers of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions witnessed rapid  growth  In H1 2021, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions  registered USD5 trillion, an increase of 44.4 percent year on year. The cumulative  turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD9.3 trillion, an  increase of 26.7 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD  swap transactions posted USD6.2 trillion, accounting for 66.5 percent of the total swap  turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled  USD52.3 billion, rising 1.9 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair  transactions totaled USD608.9 billion, increasing by 97.4 percent year on year. In  particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 60.5  percent of total market share.  7. Gold prices first went up but then dropped In H1 2021, international gold prices closed at USD1,763 per ounce, representing a loss  of 5.9 percent from end-2020. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at  RMB365.82 per gram, decreasing by 6.2 percent from end-2020. In H1 2021, the  volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 18,400 tons, representing  a decrease of 45.5 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB6.96 trillion, a decrease  of 44.0 percent year on year.  II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets  1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market  To better serve market entities and actively respond to market needs, the PBC released  Announcement No. 4 [2021] of the People‚Äôs Bank of China (Revision of the  Announcement on Bond Trading and Circulation in the Interbank Bond Market). The  announcement further improved institutional arrangements and efficiency for bond  trading and circulation, thus enhancing the capability of the bond market to serve the  real economy. To be specific, first, it is clearly specified that infrastructure agencies  shall build direct connections among their systems to achieve an electronic transmission  of information. Second, issuers or lead underwriters are no longer required to provide  the National Interbank Funding Center (NIBFC) with a list of the initial bondholders  and their holdings. Third, the function of infrastructure agencies as intermediary service  providers has been strengthened.  2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures  industry  The institutional design of the capital market was improved. In April 2021, the CSRC  released the Decision on Revising the ‚ÄúGuidelines for the Evaluation of Sci-Tech  Innovation Attributes (for Trial Implementation), which focused on supporting the core  goals of hard technology and emphasizing substance over form, implementing  classified processing and negative list management and further enriching the evaluation  indicators of science and technology attributes, and strengthening comprehensive  research and judgment. The Guidelines urged intermediaries to shoulder due  responsibilities and reinforce the supervision and inspection of implementation of the  rules so as to improve the quality of companies listed on the Science and Technology  Innovation Board at their source. In May, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on  Improving the Rules for Delisting on the National Equities Exchange and Quotations.  The Guiding Opinions improved the basic institutional framework for both voluntary  and forced delistings, clarified the post-delisting regulatory arrangements, and  emphasized the responsibility of the exchange, thus promoting a more standardized  market exit mechanism.  Protection of legitimate rights and interests of investors was strengthened. In May 2021,  the CSRC released the Elements of Asset Management Product Introduction‚ÄîPart 2:  Asset Management Plan and Related Products Offered by the Securities and Futures  Operators, which introduced the basic elements for asset management plans and  relevant securities and futures products, including their definitions, classifications,  operating modes, and risks, thus making it more convenient for investors to understand  the risk and return characteristics of the products. In June, the CSRC released two codes  concerning the content and format of information disclosures of listed companies for  the purposes of regulating the compiling of periodic reports and information disclosures  of listed companies as well as for safeguarding the investors‚Äô rights to be informed.  Construction of an information-based capital market was promoted. In June 2021, the  CSRC released the Settlement Participant Code for the Securities and Futures Industry  and four other industry standards for the financial sector in order to encourage the  standardization of data and the exchange of information within the sector.  3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market  An exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot was launched. In May 2021, the  CBIRC released the Notice on Exclusive Commercial Pension Insurance Pilots and it  decided to launch an exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot in Zhejiang  Province (including Ningbo City) and Chongqing Municipality for one year starting on  June 1, 2021. The PICC Life Insurance Company Limited and five other life insurance  companies were to carry out the pilot work. The Notice specified the methods of  payment, design of the accumulation period and annuitization period, the insurance  liabilities, rules for insurance cancellation, information disclosures, and product  management. It also made clear the regulatory support policies with respect to equity  asset allocations and the minimum capital requirement.  Corporate governance of insurance companies was improved. In June 2021, the CBIRC  released the Code of Corporate Governance of Banking and Insurance Institutions. The  Code, for the first time at the level of regulatory institutions, put forward general  requirements for the integration of the leadership of the CPC and corporate governance,  and they made clear that CPC organizations in private institutions shall be actively  availed of as political centers. The Code improved the regulatory rules for the corporate  governance of banking and insurance institutions, clarified the responsibilities of  corporate governance bodies, and further standardized operation of the corporate  governance mechanism.  Regulatory requirements for the recovery and resolution plans of insurance institutions  were improved. In June 2021, the CBIRC released the Interim Measures on  Implementing the Recovery and Resolution Plans of Banking and Insurance Institutions.  The Interim Measures specified key elements and the implementation process for the  recovery and resolution plans as well as regulatory management covering resolvability  assessment by regulatory authorities, the improvement of resolvability, and so forth.  The Interim Measures stressed that the recovery and resolution plans shall insist on  using the institution‚Äôs own assets, shareholder assistance, or other market-based  channels to raise funds to carry out a self-rescue, aiming at making institutions assume  primary responsibility and shareholders assume corresponding responsibility, and  avoiding moral hazards.  Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview  I. Global economic and financial developments  In Q2, the global economy on the whole continued to recover, but economic  performance diverged remarkably across regions. The labor market recovered slightly,  and inflation expectations rose remarkably amid the new uncertainties brought about  by the resurgence of the pandemic in many countries. In the future, evolution of the  pandemic will remain the fault line for a global economic recovery. In addition,  persistent high inflation, a possible acceleration of shifts in the monetary policy stances  of the major advanced economies, increased cross-border capital flows, and sharper  volatility of exchange rates and financial markets in the global economies, especially  in the emerging economies, also merit our attention.  1. Economic performance and financial markets of the major economies  The global economy on the whole maintained a momentum for recovery, but  divergences across regions were exacerbated. Among the advanced economies, the US  economic recovery showed a sound momentum as its annualized quarterly rate of GDP  in Q2 reached 6.5 percent and its Manufacturing and Services PMI in June registered  high levels of 60.6 and 60.1, respectively. In the euro area, the annualized quarterly rate  of GDP in Q2 reached 8.3 percent, and the Manufacturing PMI in June hit a record high  of 63.4. In Japan, the annualized quarterly rate of GDP in Q1 contracted to -3.9 percent,  and the Manufacturing PMI edged down to 52.4 in June. Among the emerging  economies, Brazil and India, both of which were severely affected by the pandemic,  witnessed year-on-year quarterly GDP growth of 0.96 percent and 1.64 percent,  respectively, in Q1. In India, the Manufacturing and Services PMI in June dipped to  48.1 and 41.2, respectively.  The resurgence of the pandemic posed a new challenge to prospects for an economic  recovery. Since March, the pandemic has rebounded in many countries, with the  number of single-day newly confirmed cases surpassing the 900,000 mark in April and  still standing at around 400,000 at end-June. Virus mutations and some countries‚Äô  reopening of their economies despite the ongoing pandemic were the major reasons for  the resurgence of the pandemic. The delta variant, which is more contagious than the  previous variants, has been found in at least 98 countries and regions and has become  the prevalent strain in many countries. As a result, pressure for global pandemic  containment is mounting.  Recovery of the labor market was slow. The US unemployment rate registered 5.9  percent in June, edging up from 5.8 percent in May, which indicated that there was still  a long way to go for the job market to return to pre-pandemic levels. The labor  participation rate remained at the low level of 61.6 percent, while job vacancies in June  were over 2 million more than the average level in 2019, demonstrating a lack of  motivation for the unemployed to resume work and the existence of prominent  structural problems, such as the coexistence of difficulties in finding both employees  and employers. Unemployment rates in the euro area in June and the UK in May also  stood at high levels of 7.7 percent and 4.8 percent, respectively. According to the  projections of the International Labour Organization, global unemployment will stand  at no less than 220 million in 2021 and the labor market will not return to pre-pandemic  levels until 2023.  Elevated inflation was common across the globe. In the US, the year-on-year (y-o-y)  growth rate of the CPI increased to 5.4 percent in June, and that of the core CPI posted  4.5 percent, hitting a record high since 1992. In the euro area, the Harmonized Index of  Consumer Prices (HICP) grew by 1.9 percent year on year in June, standing at around  the policy target of 2 percent for two consecutive months. In Japan, deflation pressures  eased slightly, and the CPI in June grew by 0.2 percent year on year, turning positive  for the first time in nine months. Compared with the CPI, the PPI rose more notably. In  June, the PPI in the US and Japan grew by 7.3 percent and 5.0 percent year on year,  respectively, while that in the euro area grew more notably by 10.2 percent. Inflation  pressures also mounted in some emerging economies, with the IPCA of Brazil and the  CPI of Russia growing by 8.4 percent and 6.5 percent year on year, respectively, in June. In terms of the global economic recovery, there was a mismatch between supply and  demand, the prospects for recovery were precarious, market expectations diverged, and  financial markets became more volatile. Commodity prices continued to surge in Q2,  and they became more volatile in July. In Q2, the futures price of Brent crude oil  increased by 16.6 percent, and the futures prices of aluminum and copper in the London  Metal Exchange (LME) increased by 13.3 percent and 7.2 percent, respectively.  International oil prices fluctuated, rebounding after a remarkable drop in mid-July.  Treasury yields underwent adjustments in the advanced economies. Ten-year Treasury  yields in the US dropped from 1.74 percent at end-March to 1.45 percent at end-June,  while those in Germany went up to a high of -0.09 percent in May from -0.27 percent  at end-March and then dropped to -0.23 percent at end-June. On the whole, the stock  markets in the major economies rose, but the volatility increased.  2. Monetary policies of the major economies  Central banks in the major advanced economies maintain accommodative monetary  policy stances. In Q2, the US Fed kept policy rates and the scale of asset purchases  unchanged, but the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in June discussed the  issue of tapering asset purchases. According to the dot-matrix plot, seven out of  eighteen FOMC members projected that policy rates would increase in 2022. The  FOMC in June also made technical adjustments to increase both the interest rate paid  on excess reserve balances and the overnight reverse repo rate by five basis points. The  European Central Bank kept policy rates unchanged and reiterated that it would  accelerate asset purchases, revise the monetary policy framework, and make an  adjustment to adopt a symmetric 2 percent inflation target over the medium term. The  Bank of Japan maintained its current monetary policy and will release plans that  encourage financial institutions to respond to climate changes.  Some emerging market economies began to increase policy rates in response to the  pressures of inflation, capital outflows, and a currency depreciation. Since the  beginning of 2021, the central banks of Russia and Brazil increased policy rates four  Unemployment Rate  (%)  2.6  2.8  2.8  2.9  3.0  3.0  3.1  3.0  3.0  2.9  2.9  2.6  2.8  3.0  2.9  CPI (year-on-year, %) 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.2  0.0  -0.4  -0.9  -1.2  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2  -0.4  -0.1  0.2  NIKKEI 225 (end of  the period)  20194 21878  22288 21710 23140 23185 22977  26434 27444 27663 28966 29179 28813 28860 28792times and three times, respectively, those in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Georgia, and other  countries increased policy rates twice, and those in Mexico, Turkey, Chile, and other  countries increased policy rates once. Against this backdrop, monetary policies  diverged among some emerging economies and advanced economies, which may have  an impact on an economic resurgence and may exacerbate imbalances in the global  economic recovery.  3. Issues that merit attention  First, the global economic recovery may be stalled by recurrent shocks from the  pandemic. Since March, the spread of Covid-19 variants at a faster pace in many  countries has led to a resurgence of the pandemic, which has been a drag on economic  recovery and has dampened market confidence to some extent. In the meantime, with  most developing countries facing vaccine shortages, there is a disparity in vaccination  progress across the globe, which may exacerbate the dual divergence of pandemic  containment and economic recovery.  Second, there is still a mismatch between supply and demand, and it remains to be seen  whether inflation will continue to rise. During the pandemic, ultra-loose monetary  policies adopted by the major advanced economies led to ample market liquidity and  substantial currency growth. In parallel, the pickup in demand outpaced that of supply  in the economic recovery, leading to chip shortages, and freight rates continued to hit  record highs. These have exerted upward pressures on commodity and durable prices.  As a result, short-term increases in global inflation have become a reality. However,  there are still big differences of opinion about whether inflation will continue over the  longer term, which requires close attention.  Third, the shifts in the monetary policies of the major advanced economies may have  spillovers and cause a spread of risks. In addition to increasing inflation pressures, huge  fiscal and monetary policy stimuli since the outbreak of the pandemic have also  spawned bubbles in asset prices, caused a deviation in financial markets from the real  economy, and increased vulnerability. An acceleration of monetary policy shifts in the  major advanced economies in the future may result in adjustments in the valuation of  financial markets, add to pressures on capital outflows and currency depreciation in  most emerging economies, and increase the risks of debt repayments and refinancing.  54II. Macroeconomic developments in China  In H1 2021, achievements to coordinate pandemic containment and economic and  social development in all regions and departments across the country were consolidated  and expanded. China‚Äôs economy sustained a steady recovery, production demand  continued to recoverÔºåand employment and consumer prices were generally stable. The  national economy witnessed steady and sound development. According to preliminary  statistics, GDP in H1 stood at RMB53.2167 trillion, growing by 12.7 percent year on  year on a comparable basis and the average growth rate of GDP during the past two  years was 5.3 percent. GDP in Q2 grew by 7.9 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate of GDP during the past two years was 5.5 percent, an acceleration of 0.5  percentage points from Q1.  1. Consumption gradually improved, investments continuously rebounded, and  imports and exports recorded rapid growth.  Residents‚Äô income grew steadily and people‚Äôs willingness to consume improved. In H1,  the country‚Äôs per capita disposable income increased by 12.6 percent year on year in  nominal terms, or 12.0 percent in real terms, with the average growth rate during the  past two years at 5.2 percent. The increase in residents‚Äô income kept pace with economic  growth. The income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents, and the  structure of income distribution continuously improved. According to the Urban  Depositors‚Äô Survey conducted by the PBC in Q2, 25.1 percent of residents were inclined  to ‚Äúconsume more,‚Äù up 2.8 percentage points from Q1. In H1, total retail sales of  consumer goods grew by 23.0 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during  the past two years was 4.4 percent, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage points from Q1.  Investments rebounded steadily and the structure continued to improve. In H1, total  fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households)  increased by 12.6 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during the past two  years registered 4.4 percent, accelerating 1.5 percentage points from Q1. In terms of  sectors, year-on-year growth of investments in the manufacturing sector was 19.2  percent, 6.6 percentage points higher than that of total investments, and the average  growth rate was 2.0 percent during the past two years. Investments in infrastructure  increased by 7.8 percent, and the average growth rate during the past two years  registered 2.4 percent. Investments in real estate development increased by 15.0 percent,  and the average growth rate during the past two years registered 8.2 percent.  Investments in the high-tech industry saw sound growth and grew by 23.5 percent year on year in H1, and the average growth rate during the past two years registered 14.6  percent, an acceleration of 4.7 percentage points from Q1. Private investment recovered  steadily, growing by 15.4 percent year on year in H1, and the average growth rate during  the past two years was 3.8 percent, an acceleration of 2.1 percentage points from Q1.  Imports and exports continued to grow rapidly. In H1, imports and exports of goods  grew by 27.1 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 28.1 percent year on  year, while imports grew by 25.9 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods  posting RMB1.6336 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve. In H1, the share  of exports of machinery and electronics increased by 0.6 percentage points year on year.  The share of imports and exports under general trade increased by 1.7 percentage points  year on year. The share of imports and exports by private enterprises increased by 2.8  percentage points year on year.  The expectations and confidence of foreign direct investments (FDI) were stable with  promising signs. In H1, actually utilized FDI increased by 28.7 percent year on year to  RMB607.84 billion, which was 27.1 percent higher than that in the same period of 2019.  Actually utilized FDI in the service industry totaled RMB482.77 billion, up 33.4  percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 39.4  percent year on year, among which FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 42.7  percent year on year and FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 29.2  percent year on year.  2. Agricultural production saw another bumper harvest, industrial production  grew steadily, and the service industry recovered continuously  In H1 2021, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by  7.8 percent, 14.8 percent, and 11.8 percent year on year, respectively. The average  growth rate of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries was 4.3 percent, 6.1  percent, and 4.9 percent, respectively, during the past two years.  Agricultural production grew steadily, and China saw another bumper grain harvest this  summer. In H1, the value-added of agriculture grew by 3.6 percent year on year, an  acceleration of 0.3 percentage point from Q1, and the average growth rate was 3.7  percent during the past two years. In H1, the output of summer grains increased by 2.1  percent year on year. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 23.0 percent year on year. Hogs in stock increased by 29.2 percent year on year at end-June.  Industrial production increased steadily, and the industrial structure was continuously  optimized. In H1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size  (IEDS) increased by 15.9 percent year on year and the average growth rate during the  last two years registered 7.0 percent, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage point from Q1.  Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 6.2 percent year on year,  and the average growth rate during the last two years registered 2.5 percent. The  manufacturing sector increased by 17.1 percent year on year, and the average growth  rate during the last two years registered 7.5 percent. The electricity, heat, gas and water  production and supply sectors increased by 13.4 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate during the last two years registered 6.0 percent. The industrial structure was  continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector  increased by 22.6 percent year on year, with the average growth rate posting 13.2  percent during the past two years. In terms of products, the average growth rates of new  energy cars, industrial robots, and integrated circuits all exceeded 30 percent,  respectively.  Growth in the services industry continued to recover, and market expectations improved.  In Q2, the value-added of the tertiary industry grew by 8.3 percent year on year, and  the average growth rate was 5.1 percent during the past two years. In June, the Index of  Service Production (ISP) increased by 10.9 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate registered 6.5 percent during the past two years. From January to May, the  revenue of Service Enterprises Above a Designated Size (SEDS) increased by 31.9  percent year on year and the average growth rate during the last two years registered  11.1 percent, which was 0.2 percentage point higher than that from January to April.  The Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 52.3 percent, remaining  above a critical point for sixteen consecutive months.  3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and producer prices rose greatly  Consumer prices increased moderately. In H1, the CPI increased by 0.5 percent year on  year, an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points from Q1. The CPI in April, May, and June  increased by 0.9 percent, 1.3 percent, and 1.1 percent year on year respectively, and the  core CPI (food and energy excluded) increased by 0.4 percent year on year. As hog  production gradually recovered and the supply of pork continued to increase, the  decline in pork prices expanded, dropping by 19.3 percent year on year in H1. As  Covid-19 prevention and control improved and the suppressed service demand  continuously recovered, the growth of non-food prices rebounded, increasing by 0.7  percent year on year in H1.  Producer prices rose greatly. In H1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 6.8  percent year on year, an acceleration of 4 percentage points from Q1. The growth rate  of PPI in April, May, and June registered 6.8 percent, 9.0 percent, and 8.8 percent,  respectively. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by  7.1 percent year on year, accelerating by 4.3 percentage points from Q1. The Corporate  Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC increased by 5.7 percent year on year,  accelerating by 2.5 percentage points from Q1.  4. Fiscal revenue experienced rapid growth  In H1 2021, revenue in the national general public budget increased by 21.8 percent  year on year to RMB11.7 trillion, accounting for 59.3 percent of annual revenue in the  budget. Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 23.2 percent and 20.6  percent year on year, respectively.  In H1 2021, expenditures in the national general budget saw an increase of 4.5 percent  year on year to RMB12.2 trillion, accounting for 48.6 percent of annual expenditures  in the budget. Specifically, central fiscal expenditures experienced a marginal drop of  6.9 percent year on year, while local fiscal expenditures edged up by 6.4 percent year  on year.  5. The employment situation remained generally stable  In H1 2021, 6.98 million people were newly employed, accounting for 63.5 percent of  the annual employment goal. In June, the surveyed urban unemployment rate was 5.0  percent, on par with that in May and down 0.7 percentage point year on year. The  surveyed urban unemployment rate in 31 major cities was 5.2 percent, on par with that  in May. The average weekly working hours of employees in enterprises were 47.6 hours,  increasing by 0.3 hours month on month.  6. The balance of payments and the external debt  A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. According to  preliminary statistics, in H1 2021 China‚Äôs current account surplus registered USD122.2  billion. Specifically, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD230.6 billion, whereas  trade in services recorded a deficit of USD43.8 billion. The capital and financial  account deficit was USD122.3 billion. Specifically, direct investments recorded a  surplus of USD123.7 billion. At end-June 2021, foreign exchange reserves posted  USD3.2140 trillion, up 1.4 percent, or USD44.0 billion from end-March. At end-March,  the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign  currencies) posted USD2.5266 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt  balance was USD1.3987 trillion, accounting for 55 percent of the total external debt  balance.  7. Analysis by sector  7.1 The real estate sector  In H1 2021, housing prices in China remained generally stable. In June, among 70  medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built residential housing prices  increased by 4.3 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.1 percentage points from March,  and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 3.5 percent year on year,  accelerating by 0.2 percentage points from March. Due to the low base figure in the  previous year, housing sales and investments in real estate development experienced  relatively rapid year-on-year growth. In H1, total floor area of sold units increased by  27.7 percent year on year, registering average growth of 8.1 percent during the past two  years. Housing sales increased by 38.9 percent year on year, registering average growth  of 14.7 percent during the past two years. In H1, investments in real estate development  grew by 15 percent year on year, registering average growth of 8.2 percent during the  past two years. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 17  percent year on year, registering average growth of 9.6 percent during the past two years  and accounting for 75.2 percent of total investments in real estate development.  On the whole, growth of real estate loans remained stable. At end-June, outstanding real  estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial  institutions) grew by 9.5 percent year on year to RMB50.8 trillion, a deceleration of 1.4  percentage points from end-March. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans  grew by 13 percent year on year to RMB36.6 trillion, a deceleration of 1.5 percentage  points from end-March. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 3.4 percent  year on year to RMB9.4 trillion, a deceleration of 2.4 percentage points from end March.  7.2 Transformation and development of the coal industry toward achieving a  carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060  The supply-side reform in the coal industry made remarkable progress, which  established a solid foundation for adjustment of the energy structure and the transition  to low carbon development toward achieving a carbon emissions peak before 2030 and  carbon neutrality before 2060. During the 13th Five-Year Plan period from 2016 to  2020, the coal industry enjoyed a shift from extensive growth focusing on quantity and  speed to intensive development focusing on quality and benefits, basically forming a  supply pattern with an advanced production capacity as the mainstay. Arrangements for  coal exploitation continued to improve, with enhanced capability to secure a stable  supply. In 2020, the output of raw coal in Shanxi, Shaanxi, and Inner Mongolia added  up to 2.79 billion tons, accounting for 71.5 percent of total output in China, and the 14  major coal bases produced 96.6 percent of the coal in China. Structural adjustments in  the coal industry made new progress with a remarkably higher degree of industrial  concentration. At end-2020, a total of 5,500 collieries ceased to operate and the  shutdown of outdated coal production capacity exceeded one billion tons per year. The  number of collieries operating nationwide shrank to less than 4,700, with the top eight  producers producing 47.6 percent of total raw coal in China. Clean and efficient use of  coal has accelerated. Remarkable results were achieved in the comprehensive  management of scattered coal as well as in the reduction and replacement of coal use  with alternative energy sources. At end-2020, the installed capacity that had undergone  low-emission and energy-savings transformation in coal-fired power plants across  China reached 950 million kilowatts, accounting for 76 percent of the total installed  capacity of coal-fired power plants nationwide. The scattered coal consumption was  reduced by more than 200 million tons in the "Thirteenth Five-Year Plan" period.  For the coal industry, opportunities and challenges will coexist in the 14th Five-Year  Plan period from 2021 to 2025. Toward achieving its carbon emissions peak before  2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060, stricter measures will be taken to control the  aggregate and intensity of coal consumption, and the proportion of coal in primary  energy consumption will continue to fall. However, some deep-rooted problems in the  coal industry that have been accumulating for a long time are yet to be solved, including  unbalanced productivity development in the industry, some enterprises still running at  a loss, and salient structural problems in coal production and coal products. Hence,  there is much pressure for a low-carbon transformation of the coal industry.  All in all, the function of coal-fired power as the last resort needs to be consolidated. In  the future, the coal industry should adapt to the new stage of development, building up  a new development paradigm for its production chain and supply chain as follows. First,  it needs to continuously improve arrangements in coal exploitation, make clear the  function of grand bases through reasonable classification, and enhance capability to  safeguard the power supply. Second, it should phase out excess production capacity,  shut down outdated production facilities, and build up advanced production facilities in  a way that improves coordination in the coal production chain. Third, it should promote  clean production and the clean and efficient use of coal and accelerate the shift toward  smart production, information-based management, a specialized division of labor, and  clean use of coal.  Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook  IÔºéOutlook for the Chinese economy  Since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and  economic and social development, and the economy has continued recovering and  improving steadily. In Q2, GDP saw a year-on-year growth of 7.9 percent, with the  growth rate averaging 5.5 percent during the past two years, which was 0.5  percentage points higher than that in Q1. In the medium and long term, China‚Äôs  development will still be at an important phase of strategic opportunities, and the  fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run and high-quality  development will remain unchanged.  China's economy has continued to recover, and the momentum for growth has  been further enhanced. In Q2, the quality and efficiency of industrial production  improved, exports maintained fairly fast growth, investment and consumption sustained  steady recovery, the employment situation was generally stable, and market  expectations remained stable. All of these have established a good foundation for  economic performance in the second half of the year. The sound monetary policy has  maintained continuity, stability, and sustainability, and significant achievements have  been made in managing market expectations in a scientific way, serving the real  economy, preventing and controlling financial risks, and keeping the macro leverage  ratio basically stable. The RMB exchange rate is expected to be stable, and it has been  moving in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing the role of a  macroeconomic stabilizer.  It should also be noted that the global pandemic continues to evolve, the external  environment is becoming more severe and complex, and the domestic economic  recovery remains unstable and imbalanced. The orderly vaccination has generally  boosted the global economic outlook, with the IMF and the World Bank in Q2 both  raising their global economic growth forecasts for 2021. However, with the recent  rampage of coronavirus variants in many countries and the resurgence of COVID-19  cases in several economies, there is still uncertainty about the future evolution of the  pandemic. The spillover effect of the ultra-loose monetary policy in the major  developed economies has become increasingly apparent, leading to significantly higher  inflation. If the pace of their monetary policy shifts accelerates, it may cause global  cross-border capital flows and exchange rate volatility to increase and financial market  valuations to adjust significantly. Domestically, the foundation for an economic  recovery is not yet solid as export growth may slow down due to the high base effect,  investment growth in some areas is relatively weak, contact-based consumption such  as catering and tourism have not been fully restored, and the sustainability of the  momentum for economic growth faces certain challenges. Enterprises‚Äô operating costs  are pushed up as commodity prices rise sharply, bringing great difficulties especially to  some micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Close attention should be  paid to the pressure of a rebound of non-performing assets and shadow banking while  the medium and long-term challenges, such as the decline in potential economic growth  rate, the accelerating aging of the population and green transformation should not be  overlooked. Therefore, it is necessary to be confident and face up to the difficulties.  The PBC will focus on fulfilling its responsibilities by properly handling the  relationship between reforms and macro management, short-term and long-term  considerations, as well as internal and external equilibria in a bid to achieve high quality development.  The CPI is rising moderately and the PPI is rising temporarily. Overall, inflation  pressures are controllable, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or  deflation. In Q2 2021, under the combined effects of the resumption of travel by  residents, rising gas and diesel prices, and falling pork prices, the CPI was at a low level  of about 1 percent, and was expected to move smoothly within a reasonable range in  the second half of the year. At the same time, due to rising commodity prices and the  low base effect, PPI growth has accelerated, which should be viewed historically and  objectively. On the one hand, as it is a high reading upon the low base of last year, the  change in the PPI can be viewed from an overall perspective based on the figures from  last year, this year, and next year; on the other hand, historically the PPI has witnessed  relatively large fluctuations, and it is not rare that it temporarily underwent a  considerable drop or a surge within a few months. Overall, the rise of China's PPI is  most probably temporary, and the PPI may remain relatively high in the short term. In  the future when the base effect subsides and global supplies gradually recover, the PPI  is likely to fall. In the medium and long term, the decline in labor productivity growth  and the aging population will curb inflation, while the explicit pricing of carbon  emissions will push up prices to some extent, hence being conducive to price stability.  As China's economy is improving steadily and a normal monetary policy has been  maintained since the outbreak of the pandemic last year, domestic aggregate supply and  demand are basically stable, which is conducive to keeping prices stable. Therefore,  there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation.  II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage  In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism  with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines of  the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic  Work Conference and will put into practice the requirements set forth in the Report on  the Work of the Government. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC  Central Committee and the State Council, it will adhere to the general principle of  pursuing progress while ensuring stability, apply the new development philosophy fully,  faithfully, and comprehensively, deepen the supply-side structural reform, accelerate  the building of a new development paradigm, and promote high-quality development.  The PBC will work to align this year and next year‚Äôs macro policies in a coordinated  way, maintain the stability of monetary policy, enhance its foresightedness and  effectiveness, and firmly refrain from adopting indiscriminate stimulus measures. By  doing so, it will continue to focus on providing support for the real economy to help  sustain the recovery of small and medium-sized enterprises and industries in difficulties  and to keep the major economic indicators within a reasonable range. With these efforts,  we will get off to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period and the economy will  see sound and sustained growth for the long term.  The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate,  giving top priority to stability. The PBC will remain committed to conducting a normal  monetary policy and attach importance to cross-cycle policy design. The autonomy of  macro policies will be enhanced,, with policy intensity and pace aligned with the  domestic economic situation and price movements. The PBC will properly handle the  relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention to keep the economy  generally stable and to strengthen the resilience of economic development. It will build  a modern central banking system while improving the modern monetary policy  framework and the mechanism for money supply management. It will keep liquidity  adequate at a reasonable level so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate  financing to the real economy (AFRE) are basically in line with nominal economic  growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. Closely following  and studying price movements, the PBC will stabilize social expectations and keep  prices generally stable. In an effort to bring into play the guiding role of structural  monetary policy tools, it will work effectively to implement the decision to extend the  expiration dates of the two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real  economy, and it will issue central bank lendings to provinces with slow credit growth.  Moreover, the PBC will take steps to put into operation the support instruments for  carbon emissions reduction, ramp up support for inclusive finance, and guide financial  institutions to intensify support for sectors such as sci-tech innovation, micro and small  businesses (MSBs), green development, and manufacturing. It will enhance the market oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by further unleashing the  potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, improving the central bank policy rate  system, optimizing regulation over deposit rates, and bringing down actual loan rates.  It will deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, enhance the RMB exchange  rate flexibility, stabilize market expectations, strengthen macro-prudential management  of cross-border financing, and guide enterprises and financial institutions to always be  risk-neutral, thereby keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and  equilibrium level. With the aim of firmly defending the bottom line that no systemic  risk should occur, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early  warning, resolution, and accountability, set up a long-term mechanism for forestalling  and defusing financial risks, and replenish the capital of small and medium-sized banks  based on their conditions.  First, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth in money and credit as well as in  the AFRE. It will improve the mechanism for money supply management by enhancing  the long-term mechanisms of liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints with which  the central bank adjusts money creation of commercial banks. The general valve of  money supply will be properly controlled so that the growth rates of money supply and  the AFRE will be basically in line with nominal economic growth and the macro  leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. A mix of monetary policy tools, such as the  Medium-term Lending Facility, open market operations, central bank lending, and  central bank discounts, will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and  to guide market rates to move around policy rates. Moreover, the PBC will reinforce  monitoring and analysis of uncertainties, such as fiscal revenue and expenditures,  government bond issuances, and monetary policy adjustments by the major economies,  to further improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of operations. At  the same time, it will manage policy intensity and pace in line with the development of  the economic and financial situations to provide strong support for the real economy. It  will improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment and prioritize support  for small and medium-sized banks in capital replenishment so that banks will be better  able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks.  Second, the PBC will move ahead with policy implementation to bring into play  the guiding role of structural monetary policy tools and will promote green low carbon development with the instrument supporting carbon emissions reduction.  It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable while effectively  implementing the decision on extending the expiration dates of the two monetary policy  tools providing direct support for the real economy. It will continue to provide inclusive  and sustained funding support for agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private  enterprises, and it will keep up the intensity of financial support for MSBs so that they  can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and safeguarding employment.  Additionally, it will issue central bank lendings to provinces with slow credit growth in  order to support coordinated development across regions. To help reach the aims of  peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality, the PBC will take steps to  put into operation the instruments supporting carbon emissions reduction, which will  provide low-cost funds for eligible financial institutions to support lending at  preferential interest rates to those areas that will significantly reduce carbon emissions.  It will guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development in line  with market-oriented principles, promote concepts such as green low-carbon life and a  circular economy to the public, and encourage social investment and financing in green  low-carbon fields.  Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective  financial support for the real economy. It will make coordinated efforts to promote  the integrated development of inclusive finance, green finance, sci-tech innovation  finance, and supply chain finance, and it will improve the system for providing financial  support for sci-tech innovation to foster a virtuous cycle among the financial sector, the  sci-tech sector, and industries. It will push for an adjustment and optimization of the  regional credit structure, step up financing support via the multi-tiered capital market,  and improve the regional financial environment. It will ensure that efforts to consolidate  the achievements in poverty eradication join up effectively with rural revitalization  efforts, for which it will continue to provide financial services and support. Emphasis  will also be placed on providing financial services for new types of agribusinesses and  stepping up financial support for key fields, such as food security and development of  the seed industry, to promote the modernization of agriculture and rural areas. Financial  institutions will be urged to optimize their internal resource allocations and policy  arrangements and to enhance the use of sci-tech approaches so that they will be better  able to provide financial services for MSMEs and a long-term mechanism will be  formed whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and  professionalism to provide loans. Moreover, the PBC will improve the system for the  management of carbon neutrality financial bonds to promote their well-regulated  development, and it will impose strict control over credit supply to energy-intensive  and high-emissions projects in order to push for their green transformation and  upgrading. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for  speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term  stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices,  housing prices, and expectations, and it will maintain the continuity, consistency, and  stability of real estate finance policies. It will also implement rules for prudential  management of real estate finance and increase financial support for the rental of  housing.  Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate  reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will enhance  the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by continuing  to unleash the potential of the LPR reform and improving the central bank policy rate  system to smooth the channels of interest rate transmission and further bring down  actual loan rates. It will optimize regulation over deposit rates, maintain fair  competition in the deposit market, and keep bank liability costs basically stable. In the  meantime, it will urge banks to transmit policy benefits to the real economy and will  increase competition in the MSB loan market so that MSBs can more easily receive  financing and their comprehensive financing costs will stabilize and fall. Taking steady  steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the  managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with  reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, and  bring into play the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an  automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. It will stabilize market expectations  and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.  The PBC will work on the development of the foreign exchange market. Guiding  enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial  institutions on the provision of services of exchange rate risk management for  enterprises with authentic needs based on the risk-neutral concept, thereby maintaining  the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. The PBC will  continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by launching the  pilot program of high-quality opening-up of cross-border trade and investment, further  facilitating use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, and steadily  advancing convertibility of the RMB under the capital account.  Fifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental system building in the financial  market to serve the real economy and to guard against market risks. Placing equal  emphasis on preventing risks and promoting development, it will continue to advance  high-quality development of the bond market. In an effort to strengthen the legal  system building in the bond market, the PBC will see that intermediary institutions fulfil  their responsibilities, and it will push for implementation of the requirements for  information disclosures regarding corporate credit bonds and improve the regulations  on credit ratings. In line with market-oriented and law-based principles, the PBC will  continue to put into practice the newly formed mechanisms for bond default resolution  and will crack down on debt evasion. Continued efforts will be made to enhance  fundamental system building in the capital market so as to better protect the interests  of investors and promote the stable and sound development of the capital market.  Sixth, the PBC will push ahead further with the reform of financial institutions  and it will continue to improve corporate governance and optimize financial  supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, it will deepen the reform of  large commercial banks and establish a modern financial enterprise system with  Chinese characteristics. Large banks will be guided to shift the focus of their services  to the primary level, while small and medium-sized banks will be encouraged to focus  on their main duties and businesses. With these efforts, the financial market is expected  to become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly  adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed. The reform of development  financial institutions and policy financial institutions will continue, with their  institutional framework improved according to the laws and regulations. Bank-specific  measures will be taken to start reform from incremental businesses and advance the  reform of existing businesses progressively and step by step. These measures are aimed  at carrying out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting,  gradually improving transparency, strengthening capital constraints as well as risk  management, enhancing incentives, and holding the institutions truly accountable. In  this way, the important role of development financial institutions and policy financial  institutions will be better brought into play in serving the real economy and supporting  national strategies.  Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early  warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism  to forestall and defuse financial risks. It will pay special attention to monitoring and  screening potential risks in key fields, act quickly to shore up weaknesses in the  regulatory framework, accelerate its work to improve the modern financial regulatory  system, and strengthen regulatory coordination. While effectively giving play to the  deposit insurance system, it will focus on early rectification and will further improve  the mechanism for professional and market-oriented risk resolution under the deposit  insurance system. The PBC will make every effort to defuse existing risks and to  contain any possible resurgence of risks. It will intensify efforts to write off non performing assets in the banking system, while capital replenishments for small and  medium-sized banks will be conducted based on their conditions. Moreover, the PBC  will push for implementation of the mechanism for fiscal and financial risk resolution  led by major local officials to stress the responsibilities of local governments for local  risk resolution, and it will urge actions to bring down the number of high-risk  institutions in the provinces of concern. It will also push for implementation of  mechanisms, such as financial risk information sharing and accountability for major  financial risks, to effectively prevent moral hazards. The PBC will work towards  financial risk prevention that is more forward-looking, broad-sighted, and preemptive  so as to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur.  
Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis  Starting from 2021, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with  Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, following the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary  Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work  Conference, and implementing the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of  the Government, the People's Bank of China (PBC) pursued a sound monetary policy  which is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. Money, credit, and aggregate  financing to the real economy gained reasonable growth. Overall financing costs  remained stable, albeit with a slight decline. Financial support for the real economy,  key areas, and weak links was further strengthened. All this buttressed stable  performance of the economy with good momentum.  I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level  In Q2 2021, the PBC pursued a sound monetary policy that is flexible, targeted,  reasonable, and appropriate. It made scientific judgments about macroeconomic  conditions and implemented the concept of a cross-cycle design. By comprehensively  using multiple policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) and open  market operations (OMOs), to inject liquidity, and conducting these operations in a  more forward-looking, flexible, and effective manner, the PBC maintained adequate  liquidity in the banking system at a reasonable level. In the meantime, the PBC  strengthened direct communications with market entities in many ways to stabilize  market expectations, and it steadily released policy rate signals. Market interest rates  were guided to move around the OMO rates, further strengthening the stability of  interest rates. On July 15, the PBC reduced the required reserve ratio (RRR) by 0.5  percentage points, optimizing the capital structure of financial institutions through  liquidity management. The PBC proactively took into consideration factors, such as the  peak tax period, the maturity of the MLF, and the accelerated issuance of local  government bonds, and placed an emphasis on balancing demand and supply of market  funds. Thus, the short, medium, and long-term liquidity supply was kept adequate at a  reasonable level, basically in line with market demand. At end-June, the excess reserve  ratio of financial institutions registered 1.2 percent, down 0.4 percentage points from  the corresponding period of 2020.  II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the lending rates at  historically low levels  Credits provide solid support for the real economy. During the COVID-19 pandemic,  there was an increase in enterprises鈥� demand for additional financing, which was fully  satisfied by financial institutions. This pushed up the base of financial data in H1 2020.  Despite a high base, financial data still witnessed fairly large year-on-year growth in  H1 2021, with the normal financing demands of enterprises satisfied and support for  the real economy steady. At end-June, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions  in domestic and foreign currencies grew 11.9 percent year on year to RMB191.6 trillion,  increasing RMB13.2 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and RMB500.2 billion more  than the increase during the corresponding period of 2020, respectively. Outstanding  RMB-denominated loans grew 12.3 percent year on year to RMB185.5 trillion, up  RMB12.8 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an increase that was RMB667.7  billion larger than that during the corresponding period of 2020.  With the credit structure continuously being improved, key areas and weak links, such as the manufacturing sector and micro and small businesses (MSBs), received targeted  support. At end-June, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities  grew by RMB6.6 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of  RMB1.8 trillion. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector increased  by 41.6 percent, marking the fourth consecutive month of growth over 40 percent. In  particular, the high-tech manufacturing sector witnessed a year-on-year increase of 46.3  percent. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 31 percent year on year to  RMB17.7 trillion, 18.7 percentage points higher than that of total loans during the same  period. These loans supported 38.3 million MSBs, rising 29.2 percent year on year. The weighted average interest rates on loans hit a record low. In 2021, the PBC  continued to release the potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, guided actual  lending rates to go down amidst stability, and encouraged the financial sector to cut  profits in favor of the real economy. In the meantime, the PBC optimized regulation  over deposit rates and adjusted the self-disciplinary ceiling for deposit rates, leading to  a decline in the borrowing costs of banks. In June, the one-year LPR and the over-five year LPR stood at 3.85 percent and 4.65 percent, respectively, on par with those in  December 2020. The weighted average lending rate recorded 4.93 percent in June,  sinking to a new low. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans  registered 5.20 percent, down 0.06 percentage point year on year, hitting a record low.  The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.06 percentage point year on year  to 4.58 percent, reaching historically low levels. This indicates that financial support  for the real economy continues to yield positive results.  In June, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered  67.67 percent, 8.07 percent, and 24.25 percent, respectively.  Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans declined slightly. In June, the  weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits  with maturities within 3 months registered 0.10 percent and 0.43 percent, down 0.06  and 0.16 percentage point from December 2020, respectively. The weighted average  interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with  maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.15 percent  and 0.99 percent, down 0.07 percentage points and 0.37 percentage points from  December 2020, respectively.  Deposits grew steadily. At end-June, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign  currencies in all financial institutions increased 9.5 percent year on year to RMB233.2  trillion, up RMB14.8 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an acceleration of  RMB50.1 billion. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 9.2 percent year on year to  RMB226.7 trillion, an increase of RMB14 trillion from the beginning of the year and a  deceleration of RMB506.4 billion. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at  USD1 trillion, an increase of USD129.7 billion from the beginning of 2021 and an  acceleration of USD109.1 billion. This was against the backdrop of China leading the  global economic recovery and a widened trade surplus. III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy displayed  appropriate growth  Outstanding M2 recorded RMB231.8 trillion at end-June, increasing 8.6 percent year  on year, and thus maintaining strong support for the real economy. Outstanding M1 and  M0 registered RMB63.7 trillion and RMB8.4 trillion, respectively, increasing 5.5  percent and 6.2 percent year on year. H1 2021 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB3.2  billion, which is RMB223.8 billion less than that in the same period of the previous  year.  According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real  economy (AFRE) at end-June reached over RMB300 trillion, recording RMB301.56  trillion specifically. Year-on-year growth registered 11 percent, decelerating 2.3  percentage points compared to the growth recorded at end-2020. The AFRE increment  in H1 2021 totaled RMB17.74 trillion, dropping RMB3.13 trillion year on year. It  shows the following characteristics: first, RMB-denominated loans recorded a larger  year-on-year increase. Second, trust loans and undiscounted bankers鈥� acceptances  recorded a significantly larger year-on-year drop. Third, corporate bonds showed a  year-on-year drop in growth, while domestic equity financing of non-financial  companies exhibited a year-on-year increase. Fourth, government bonds recorded a  significantly smaller year-on-year increase. Fifth, asset-backed securities of depository  institutions showed a larger year-on-year increase. Box 1 A Proper Understanding of Money and Inflation  There are views that the relationship between money and inflation is no longer  functional because in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008, the prolonged over issuance of money in the major advanced economies did not lead to high inflation.  Consequently, central bank purchasing of assets as a way to expand money supply has  become the elixir that can spur the economy without causing high inflation. In this  respect, it is necessary to take a proper view of the difference between the quantitative  easing (QE) policies unveiled following the 2008 global financial crisis and those  policies adopted in response to the 2020 pandemic, and correctly understand the  relationship between money and inflation.  First, the QE policy that focuses on increasing base money, under which real  money growth is limited. For nearly a decade following the 2008 global financial crisis,  various factors had contributed to low inflation in the major advanced economies, such  as globalization and technological development on the supply side, the aging population,  debt overdrafts, and wealth polarization on the demand side. From a monetary  perspective, although central banks in the US, Europe, and Japan adopted QE policies  and significantly expanded their balance sheets from end-Q3 2008 to end-2017 to  increase base money, average annual growth of money supply (broad money) in these  regions were only 6.5 percent, 2.8 percent, and 2.7 percent, respectively, which roughly  matched their average nominal GDP growth of 3.1 percent, 1.8 percent, and 0.4 percent  during the same period. This is the fundamental reason that the advanced economies  did not experience a significant inflation. It should be noted that in a modern banking and credit money system, the direct money  creators are banks rather than the central bank, and QE policies, including central bank  purchases of government bonds, do not necessarily drive money growth. Base money  is different from money in that it mainly serves the purpose of reserve requirements in  the banking system and payment clearing needs. Therefore, it is money that is used in  circulation by economic entities, and it is created by banks through asset expansions,  such as bank loans. Thus, in the long term, it is money and not base money that is  closely related to inflation. After the 2008 crisis, central bank purchases of government  bonds in the US and other advanced economies led to higher excess reserves in the  banking system. But as central bank purchases mainly included existing government  bonds in the market, there were no significant monetized deficits. In addition, the  banking system was not enthusiastic about creating money through bank loans, which  kept the corresponding excess reserves within the banking system and thus did not  cause significant growth of money. From end-August 2008 before the crisis to end-  2017, the balance sheets of the central banks in the US, Europe, and Japan expanded  375 percent, 209 percent, and 375 percent, respectively, while money supply during the  same period only increased 80 percent, 30 percent, and 27 percent, far lower than the  expansion rates of the central bank balance sheets.  Second, QE policies adopted to increase money in coordination with fiscal policies,  which significantly fueled the global inflation in 2021. After the outbreak of the  pandemic in 2020, to address its impact and support an economic recovery, the major  advanced economies adopted a policy combination of an excessively loose monetary  policy and a massive fiscal stimulus, thereby driving money growth through  government-led efforts. From the perspective of the underlying mechanism: the central  bank buys government bonds and increases excess reserves, which are turned into fiscal  deposits through new issues of government bonds; fiscal deposits are then turned into  deposits of economic entities through fiscal spending of households and businesses.  The combinations of these interwoven operations cause money to grow. In 2020, the  US Fed purchased about 52 percent of newly issued Treasury bonds, and the money  supply generated from this support to fiscal spending constituted 61 percent of M2  growth in the US. As of end-2020, money supply in the US, Europe, and Japan recorded  year-on-year growth of 24.9 percent, 12.3 percent, and 7.6 percent, while nominal GDP  growth registered -2.3 percent, -5 percent, and -4 percent, respectively. Money growth  was highly inconsistent with nominal GDP growth. In terms of consumer price  movements, inflation was most serious in the US, and the gap between monetary  expansion and nominal GDP growth was also the widest. The US CPI in June reached  a 13-year high of 5.4 percent, up 4 percentage points from end-2020. Meanwhile, the  CPI in Europe and Japan were up 2.2 and 1.4 percentage points, respectively, from end-  2020. It should also be noted that government-led growth of broad money has  undesirable consequences, such as disrupting financial discipline, damaging the ability  of the banking system to create money in a market-oriented manner, and a lack of  vitality in the economy.  In general, the relationship between money and inflation is unchanged, and a massive  over-issuance of money will inevitably intensify inflation. Therefore, the key to keeping  inflation stable is to maintain sound management of money. Current inflation pressures  in China are generally contained, which can be attributed to the fact that since last May  the growth of money supply in China has been returning to its normal level at a faster  pace than that in other large economies. As of end-June 2021, M2 growth in China  registered 8.6 percent, basically equivalent to its pre-pandemic level and corresponding  to nominal economic growth, thus keeping prices stable from a macro standpoint. Next,  it is necessary that monetary policy continue to prioritize stability. A sound monetary  policy should be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. The PBC will keep the  growth of money supply and the AFRE generally in line with nominal economic growth,  and it will stick to its role as a fund provider that is separate from the fiscal authorities  so as to fundamentally ensure the overall stability of consumer prices.  IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and  equilibrium level  Since the beginning of 2021, cross-border capital flows and foreign-exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium. Market expectations have been  generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved  in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In  H1, the RMB appreciated to some extent against a basket of currencies. At end-June,  the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the  RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at  98.00 and 96.77, respectively, up 3.3 percent and 2.7 percent from end-2020. According  to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), as of end-June 2021,  the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER)  of the RMB have appreciated 2.9 percent and 0.3 percent since end-2020, and 41.7  percent and 51.9 percent since the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism  that began in 2005. The RMB appreciated against the US dollar in H1. At end-June, the  central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.4601, appreciating 1.0 percent  from end-2020 and 28.1 percent on a cumulative basis since the reform of the exchange  rate formation mechanism that began in 2005. In H1, the annualized volatility rate of  the RMB against the US dollar was 3.5 percent.  Cross-border RMB settlements in H1 totaled RMB17.6 trillion, increasing 39 percent  year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB8.9 trillion and  RMB8.6 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account  grew by 17 percent year on year to RMB3.6 trillion, among which RMB settlements of  trade in goods registered RMB2.7 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in  services and other items registered RMB952.69 billion. Cross-border RMB settlements  under the capital account posted RMB14 trillion, increasing 46 percent year on year. In Q2 2021, the PBC resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by  the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and kept the sound monetary policy  flexible and targeted, and at a reasonable and appropriate level. The PBC conducted  open market operations (OMOs) in a targeted manner, advanced the market-based  reforms of interest rates and exchange rates, further leveraged the targeted guidance  role of structural monetary policy instruments, and intensified policy support to areas  that call for long-term support, such as scientific and technological innovations, micro  and small businesses (MSBs), green development, and manufacturing, thus fostering a  favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development.  I. Conducting open market operations  Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. The PBC fully analyzed  market developments in terms of the supply and demand of funds, and conducted  successive open market operations daily to enhance operational flexibility, preciseness,  and effectiveness, to avoid both liquidity strains and excessive idle funds arising from  oversupply and to maintain liquidity within the banking system at a proper and adequate  level that was neither too tight nor loose, with the provision of medium and long-term  liquidity via monetary policy instruments such as the Medium-term Lending Facility  (MLF) as the basis. The central bank鈥檚 cross-cyclical arrangements reduced liquidity  fluctuations, stabilized market expectations, lowered the demand for precautionary  funds, and enhanced the efficiency of its liquidity operations. In late June, the PBC  properly scaled up its open market reverse repurchase operations (repos) to satisfy the  market鈥檚 short-term funding needs at the end of the six-month period and to maintain  money-market stability at the end of the first half-year.  Guiding market rates to move around central bank policy rates. In Q2 2021, both  the rates paid on the MLF and the reverse repos remained unchanged. Meanwhile, the  PBC sent short-term policy rate signals through daily operations of 7-day reverse repos,  and guided money-market rates to move around the OMO rates. As a result, the  fluctuation of interest rates declined further, market expectations became more stable,  and OMO rates played a strengthened role as the pivotal short-term rates. In Q2 2021,  the weighted average rate on 7-day repos between depository institutions in the  interbank market (DR007) averaged 2.16 percent, close to the central bank鈥檚 7-day  reverse repo rate. The money-market rates at end-Q2 remained stable, and the  deviations from the OMO rates sharply narrowed compared to those in previous years.  Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q2 2021, the  PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15  billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent.  Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a  monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in  the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of  perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized  banks.  Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q2 2021, the PBC  issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling  RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10  billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. In H1 2021, the issuance of  six batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills totaled RMB60 billion, which  enriched the RMB investment products and the RMB liquidity management tools in the  Hong Kong market, propelled both domestic and overseas market entities to issue  RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market, and  helped promote the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market.  In H1 2021, offshore RMB bond issuances, excluding RMB-denominated central bank  bills issued in Hong Kong, registered roughly RMB100 billion, a year-on-year increase  of 80 percent. Moreover, the RMB offshore market saw increasingly brisker  transactions Box 2 The Management of Monetary Policy Expectations Attained Notable  Achievements  Developing a mechanism for the management of monetary policy expectations is an  important step to improve a modern monetary policy framework. The increasingly rule based and transparent monetary policy operations as well as the establishment of an  institutionalized monetary policy communications mechanism facilitate effective  management and guidance of public expectations, and they boost the consistency  between market entities and policy goals, thereby stabilizing the macro economy. The  14th Five-year Plan for Economic and Social Development and the Long-range  Objectives through the Year 2035 sets out to improve the formulation and  implementation mechanism for macro policies and to attach importance to the  management and guidance of expectations. In recent years, when formulating and  implementing monetary policies, the PBC has continued to improve expectation  management and it has developed a scientific and effective mechanism for the  management and guidance of monetary policy expectations, thus enhancing the central  bank鈥檚 transparency and accountability.  Enhancing a modern monetary policy framework and elevating monetary policy  transparency. Under a modern monetary policy framework, the PBC clarified its  intermediary target that the growth of money supply and of aggregate financing to the  real economy (AFRE) roughly matched nominal economic growth, clarifying how  monetary policy objectives should be anchored. The PBC improved the policy rates  system with open market operation (OMO) rates and the MLF rates serving as short  and medium-term policy rates respectively and it targeted these two rates in operations,  enabling institutions and the public to observe the monetary policy orientation. The  PBC deepened the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and improved the formation and  transmission mechanism of market-based rates from policy rates to the LPR and to  lending rates, which significantly enhanced policy transmission efficiency and greatly  improved the central bank鈥檚 efficiency in information transmission.  Improving the regular monetary policy communication mechanism and fostering stable  market expectations. The PBC gradually fixed the frequency of expectations  management as it conducted successive daily open market operations and MLF  operations at a fixed time in the middle of each month with the release of operation  arrangements in advance to stabilize market expectations; the PBC illustrated its  monetary policy stance and released monetary policy signals in each of the 12 months,  as in each quarter it held a press briefing on financial statistics in the first month,  released the China Monetary Policy Report in the second month, and held a quarterly  meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee and released an announcement in the third  month; the PBC held working conferences early and mid-year and issued press releases;  the PBC released the Annual Report of the PBC and the Report of China鈥檚 Regional  Financial Development annually to objectively reflect the effects of its monetary  policies.  Diversifying the methods used in monetary policy communications and effectively  enhancing the efficiency of communications with the public. The PBC responded to  market concerns through a wide range of methods, including attending  regular State Council policy briefings and press conferences of the State Council  Information Office, releasing answers to press questions regarding certain policies and  the transcripts of press conferences (briefings), participating in interviews with  domestic and foreign media, and publishing signed articles; the PBC reported its  judgments about the economic and financial situation and about future targeted  approaches to the Financial and Economic Affairs Committee of the National People鈥檚  Congress (NPC) and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC),  and held consultative meetings with financial experts and industry associations to  introduce the work concerning monetary policies, to exchange ideas, and to establish a  two-way interaction mechanism; the PBC effectively leveraged the combined strength  of its new media matrix, including its WeChat account and Weibo and its Chinese and  English websites, to create a diversified three-dimensional system for expectations  management and guidance.  The effective management of monetary policy expectations primarily lies in the PBC  鈥減racticing what it preaches.鈥� The mutual verification and coordination between the  PBC鈥檚 policy operations and external communications reinforces the accountability of  monetary policies. In terms of liquidity expectations from the market, the PBC guided  financial institutions to focus on the level of interest rates instead of focusing too much  on the amount of liquidity, and the central bank conducts OMOs each day to send short term policy rate signals. Since the beginning of 2021, the liquidity and money-market  rates have remained stable, with no large fluctuations at the end of each month and at  the end of each quarter, and the deviation of the DR007 in relation to the OMO rates on  the 7-day reverse repos remained low compared with the same period in recent years,  thus providing a stable environment for liquidity management by financial institutions  and for stabilizing market expectations. Stable market expectations further reduced  precautionary liquidity demands and enhanced liquidity stability.  On balance, the management of monetary policy expectations scored notable  achievements as the monetary policy framework was more open and straightforward,  monetary policy operations became more rule-based and transparent, monetary policy  communications were more regular and institutionalized, the efficiency of  communications between the PBC and the public improved significantly, and the  efficiency of monetary policy transmissions was enhanced. In the next stage, the PBC  will continue to uphold the people-centered philosophy of governance, focus on  enhancing the transparency of the monetary policy framework, maintain the efficiency  and fairness of expectations management, further improve equity in access to  information by the public, and bolster the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission  and the accountability of the central bank.  II. Timely conducting Standing Lending Facility and Medium-term Lending  Facility operations  Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. To ensure an appropriate supply of  medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions  of the medium-term policy rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1.25 trillion of  MLF operations in H1, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.95  percent. The MLF operations conducted in Q2 totaled RMB450 billion. At end-June,  the outstanding MLF registered RMB5.40 trillion, RMB250 billion more than that at  the beginning of 2021.  Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner.  The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was  met in the full amount. In H1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB59.1 billion in SLF  operations, of which operations in Q2 registered RMB11.6 billion and the balance of  such operations at end-June posted RMB8.6 billion. The SLF rate played its role as the  ceiling of the interest rate corridor, and it safeguarded the smooth operation of the  money market. At end-June, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 3.05  percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively, on par with the rates at the end of  the previous quarter. In May 2021, the PBC issued the Notice on Issues Concerning  Improvements in SLF Management (YinFa No.135 [2021]) to strengthen SLF  management. The efficiency of SLF operations improved through a systemic  transformation that enabled small and medium financial institutions to borrow SLF in  the form delivery versus payment (DVP).  .  III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions  The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was raised for financial institutions  and foreign exchange liquidity management of financial institutions was enhanced.  The PBC decided to raise the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by two percentage  points, from 5 percent to 7 percent, effective on June 15, 2021, soaking up foreign  exchange liquidity in the amount of over USD 20 billion.  The required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered by 0.5 percentage  points in an attempt to support the real economy and ensure that costs of overall  financing drop steadily. The PBC decided to reduce the required reserve ratio by 0.5  percentage point, effective on July 15 (not applicable to financial institutions that had  already carried a required reserve ratio of 5 percent), releasing about RMB 1 trillion of  long-term funds. After this round of RRR cuts, the weighted average required reserve  ratio for financial institutions stood at 8.9 percent. This RRR reduction is a conventional  operation following normalization of monetary policies, aimed at improving the  funding structure of financial institutions and enhancing their capability to allocate  funds. First, by keeping adequate liquidity at a reasonable level, the PBC created a  favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality development and  supply-side structural reform. Second, by optimizing the financing structure of financial  institutions, the PBC effectively expanded the sources of long-term stable funding for  financial institutions to support the real economy and guided these institutions to  actively use the funds released from the RRR reduction to boost support for MSBs.  Third, the RRR reduction lowered the funding costs of financial institutions by  approximately RMB13 billion per year, which further reduced overall social financing  costs through the transmission of financial institutions.  IV. Further improving the macro-prudential management framework  The role of the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into  play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural  reform of the financial sector. In H1 2021, in line with the requirements for the key  tasks set at the Central Economic Work Conference, the PBC further improved the  MPA and attached more importance to the assessment requirements to support key  areas and weak links. It dynamically adjusted the relevant assessment indicators in an  attempt to guide financial institutions to step up support to provide medium and long term financing to inclusive MSBs and the manufacturing sector.  The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was  improved. In order to implement the requirements established by the Guiding Opinions  on Improving Supervision of Systemically Important Financial Institutions, the PBC  issued supporting regulations in line with the Measures for Assessments of Systemically  Important Banks (SIBs). The PBC, jointly with the CBIRC, drafted the Additional  Regulatory Rules for Systemically Important Banks (Trial) (Exposure Draft)  (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), and solicited public opinion starting from April 2.  The Rules specify additional regulatory requirements on SIBs in terms of an indicator  system, recovery and resolution schemes, and prudential regulatory measures, and they urge the SIBs to reduce systemic risks and to enhance their resilience and bail-in  capabilities.  V. Actively leveraging the role of structural monetary policy instruments  The PBC actively used central bank lending to support rural development, central  bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, and other tools to guide financial  institutions to step up support for areas such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture,  rural areas, and rural people as well as for poverty alleviation. The role of central  bank lending was further brought into play to provide targeted liquidity and to serve as  positive incentives. Central bank lending to support rural development and central bank  lending for MSBs was used to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to  expand the supply of credit for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty  alleviation was rolled over according to the current regulations so as to underpin and  consolidate the achievements of poverty eradication. Coordinated development of the  regional economy and finance was promoted with a newly added quota of RMB200  billion of central bank lending to ten provinces with slow credit growth. Locally  incorporated financial institutions were guided to step up policy support for areas such  as agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private enterprises in these ten provinces. As of  end-June, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development stood at  RMB465.3 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty  alleviation posted RMB888.2 billion and RMB201.4 billion, respectively. Outstanding  central bank discounts registered RMB592.2 billion. In H1, the PBC made net  withdrawals of PSLs in the amount of RMB142.4 billion from development and policy  banks, with net withdrawals in Q2 totaling RMB101.4 billion and the outstanding PSLs  registering RMB3.0926 trillion at end-June.  Targeted Medium-term Lending Facility (TMLF) operations maturing in Q2 were  rolled over in the form of MLFs. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding  source for financial institutions to expand their credit supply to MSBs and private firms  with preferential interest rates. On April 15, the PBC conducted one-year MLF  operations totaling RMB150 billion, with a rate of 2.95 percent, including the rollover  of TMLFs maturing in April. At end-June, the TMLFs maturing in Q2 were rolled over  in the form of MLFs, with the outstanding TMLFs posting zero.  Highlighting the characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary policy  instruments that directly support the real economy were continuously promoted,  with the aim of bolstering the development of MSMEs. From the introduction of the  policy in June 2020 to end-June 2021, operations of instruments supporting deferred  repayments of inclusive MSB loans were conducted on a monthly basis and provided a  total of RMB14.5 billion in incentive funds to local corporate banks to support  extensions of repayments of the principal of inclusive small and micro enterprise loans.  A total of RMB1.4478 trillion was used to alleviate the pressures on small and micro  enterprises to repay the principal and interest in stages. The support plan for inclusive  unsecured MSB loans operated on a quarterly basis. Cumulative preferential funding of  RMB221.5 billion was used to provide support for the issuance RMB620.4 billion of  unsecured loans to MSBs, thereby effectively alleviating their difficulties to access  financing. From the beginning of 2020 to June 2021, banking institutions nationwide  deferred RMB11.8 trillion of principal and interest repayments totaling RMB11.8  trillion and issued cumulative inclusive unsecured MSB loans totaling RMB6.9 trillion.  In line with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State  Council, the PBC promoted the launch of instruments in support of carbon  emissions reductions. According to the requirements set forth in the Report on the  Work of the Government and the decisions of the executive meeting of the State Council,  the PBC launched a structural monetary policy instrument supporting carbon emissions  reductions. Through the provision of low-cost funds for eligible financial institutions,  the PBC supported financial institutions by providing funding at preferential interest  rates to key projects that will significantly reduce carbon emissions. As a structural  monetary policy instrument providing direct support for the real economy, the PBC  supported developments in areas of clean energy, energy savings and environmental  protection, and carbon emissions reduction technology in a precise and direct manner,  and it leveraged more social funding to promote carbon emissions reduction. In line  with market-oriented, law-based, and international principles, the design of the  instrument fully exhibits openness and transparency. With such a 鈥渇easible, calculable,  and verifiable鈥� design, the instrument is precise and direct. Being feasible means that  efforts are made to clearly support key areas that will significantly reduce carbon  emissions, including clean energy, energy savings and environmental protection, and  carbon emissions reduction technology. Being calculable means that financial  institutions can calculate the amount of carbon emissions reductions driven by loans,  and they can disclose the information on carbon emissions reductions, subject to social  supervision. Being verifiable means that third-party professional institutions can be  introduced to verify the authenticity of the information disclosed by financial  institutions so as guarantee their policy effects.  Box 3 The Role of Monetary Policy in Supporting Regional Coordinated  Development  At the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), it was  proposed that the principal challenge facing Chinese society has shifted to the gap  between unbalanced and inadequate development and the people鈥檚 ever-growing needs  for a better life. According to the requirements of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th  CPC Central Committee, coordinated development between urban and rural areas and  among regions should be enhanced notably during the 14th Five-Year Plan. Meanwhile,  the new development concept also places an emphasis on coordinated development. At  present, the economic downturn and financial issues are interconnected in some regions,  with a poor cycle between the economy and finance and fairly slow growth of credit.  In order to promote coordinated regional development, targeted measures that suit local  conditions need to be adopted to increase credit supply to regions with slow credit  growth, thereby helping foster a virtuous circle between the economy and finance.  The PBC attaches great importance to promoting coordinated regional  development. Multiple measures have been adopted and coordinated efforts have  been made to guide all kinds of financial institutions to enhance credit support to  regions with slow credit growth, under the precondition that risks are kept well  under control. First, policy banks are guided to remedy their weaknesses in regional  development. The three policy banks, namely, China Development Bank,  Agricultural Development Bank of China, and Export-Import Bank of China, are  required to guarantee that the proportion of new loans in certain regions to their new  loans in 2021 be no less than that in 2020, and they should strive to raise that proportion.  Second, full play should be given to the national commercial banks, especially the large  state-owned banks, to spearhead their role in credit supply. In line with market-oriented  and law-based principles, and under the precondition of sound risk control, banks are  guided to optimize their internal assessments and incentive measures and to increase  the credit supply in the relevant regions according to local conditions so as to support  coordinated regional development. The Agricultural Bank of China is required to  effectively use the preferential required reserve ratio policy granted for its Finance  Division of Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Rural People and to beef up support for  regions with slow credit growth. The proportion of new loans provided by the Finance  Division of Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Rural People to the relevant regions to all  new loans in 2021 should be higher than that in 2020. Third, local financial institutions  should be fully motivated as the central bank increased the quota of central bank lending  by RMB200 billion to the relevant regions. In addition, under the precondition of  guaranteeing the safety of central bank funds, the requirements have been properly  eased for eligible borrowers. Local financial institutions are guided to step up credit  support for weak links, such as agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private enterprises,  under the precondition of sound risk control.  A series of targeted measures have produced positive results. First, support policies  of central bank lending have been promoted in an orderly manner, achieving notable  results in leveraging the loans of locally incorporated financial institutions in certain  regions. As of end-June 2021, the PBC issued central bank lending in the amount of  RMB160 billion, accomplishing 80 percent of the total quota. In H1 2021, new loans  by locally incorporated financial institutions witnessed a notable increase in certain  regions. Second, policy banks and national commercial banks have actively  implemented policies and have stepped up support for regions with fairly slow credit  growth. The supply of credit has been enhanced to relevant regions through increasing  the allocation of credit resources, optimizing the pricing of internal fund transfers and  capital employment, and implementing differentiated internal assessments and  incentive measures.  In H1 2021, the proportion of new loans in certain regions to all new loans issued by  the three policy banks and the six large state-owned commercial banks witnessed a  year-on-year increase. It is the same case with the Finance Division of Agriculture,  Rural Areas, and Rural People of the Agricultural Bank of China. Overall, the credit  situation has obviously improved in regions with slow credit growth. In certain regions,  both the amount of new RMB loans and the proportion to new loans across the country  saw a year-on-year rise in H1 2021.  Going forward, the PBC will continue to effectively implement all measures and  constantly track and monitor the use of RMB200 billion of central bank lending. Further  support will be given to such provinces by the rapid issuance of central bank lending, a  high ratio of utilization, and active introduction of corresponding measures by the local  governments in an attempt to give full play to the leveraging role of central bank lending.  Various kinds of financial institutions will be guided to continuously enhance credit  support for regions with slow credit growth. Efforts will be made to accelerate  improvements in the financial environment, to smooth the virtuous circle between the  economy and finance, and to guide the shift toward positive expectations, so as to create  a favorable environment for achieving high-quality development in certain regions.  VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy to guide structural reform  Financial support to keep businesses and employment stable was enhanced. The  Notice on Promoting the Project of Enhancing the Capacity to Provide Financial  Services for Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises (Yinfa No. 176 [2021]) was  issued, which established detailed requirements for improving the capacity to provide  financial services for MSMEs and strengthened the building of a long-term mechanism  for 鈥渓ending with confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism.鈥� A dedicated  project with the theme of 鈥淟ending to Support Small Businesses for Serving the General  Public鈥檚 Livelihood鈥� was launched in a bid to boost financial support for self-employed  businesses and to further improve financial services. At end-June 2021, outstanding  inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 31 percent year on year to RMB17.7 trillion. These  loans supported 38.30 million MSBs, an increase of 29.2 percent year on year.  Effective support was provided to consolidate and expand the achievements of  poverty eradication and to comprehensively promote rural revitalization. The PBC,  jointly with five other departments, released the Opinions on Financial Support for  Consolidating Achievements in the Critical Battle against Poverty and  Comprehensively Promoting Rural Revitalization (Yinfa No. 171 [2021]), which  adjusted and optimized financial support policies. It clarified priorities and key  measures in terms of effectively linking up the consolidation and expansion of poverty  eradication achievements with rural revitalization, optimized  the comprehensive system of financial organizations in rural areas, integrated and  improved financial products for rural development, and expanded direct financing  channels for agro-related areas. The PBC rolled out appraisal and assessment measures  on financial institutions鈥� services for rural revitalization in an attempt to enhance  incentive and constraint effects as well as to guide financial institutions to continuously  enhance their financial resource inputs in support of rural revitalization. At end-June  2021, outstanding agro-related loans increased 10.1 percent year on year to RMB41.66  trillion.  Financial support for key areas such as new types of agribusinesses was enhanced  remarkably. The PBC took the lead in issuing the Opinions on Extending Financial  Support for the Development of New Types of Agribusinesses (Yinfa No.133 [2021]).  It guided financial institutions to continuously boost the availability, coverage, and facility of financial services for new types of agribusinesses, promoted the integrated  development of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in rural areas, and enhanced  the quality, economic performance, and competitiveness of agriculture.  Financial support for key areas such as sci-tech innovations and the  manufacturing sector was strengthened. The PBC made efforts to enhance and  improve financial support for sci-tech innovations, to meet the effective financing  demands of core enterprises aimed at seeking key technology breakthroughs, and to  boost the availability of financing for tech-SMEs. Financial institutions were guided to  increase the supply of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector so as  to promote its high-quality development. At end-June 2021, outstanding medium and  long-term loans to the manufacturing sector soared by 41.6 percent year on year, the  growth of which stood above 40 percent for four consecutive months. In particular,  growth of the high-tech manufacturing sector witnessed a year-on-year increase of 46.3  percent.  Financial support for green development was intensified. A symposium was held  on adjusting the credit structure of major nationwide banks. Financial institutions were  guided to increase their support for green and low-carbon industries. With the aim of  achieving the strategic goals of a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality, the PBC  introduced carbon neutrality-related special financial bonds and carbon neutrality related debt financing instruments on the interbank market so as to support projects  with significant effects on carbon emissions reductions. Based on market-oriented  principles, commercial banks were guided to provide reasonable and necessary support  for the transformation and upgrading of coal and other traditional energy industries.  VII. Further deepening the market-based interest rate reform  Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC further deepened the market-based interest-rate  reform, continuously unleashed the potential of the reform in reducing loan interest  rates, and optimized regulation of deposit interest rates, pushing actual loan rates further  downward. First, with continued progress in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and  application of the LPR, the financing costs of enterprises witnessed a further decline.  Second, regulation of deposit rates was improved. After modification, the self disciplined ceiling of deposit rates will be determined by adding basis points to the  benchmark interest rates; this was formally put into practice on June 21. Third, order  in the credit market was regulated. Lenders of all sorts were promoted to explicitly  indicate the annualized interest rates of their loan products so as to effectively protect  the rights of financial consumers to be informed. Fourth, the PBC promoted a shift in  the pricing benchmark for USD floating-rate loans by financial institutions and it  guided the market self-discipline mechanism for interest rates to study and issue the  recommended agreement format for domestic USD floating-rate loans. Starting from  June 1, financial institutions can sign contracts for USD floating-rate loans with  reference to the format or they can make adaptive adjustments to the recommended  format based on actual conditions.  Box 4 Actual Loan Interest Rates were Generally Stable with a Decline  Since the beginning of 2021, the sound monetary policy has maintained stability as its  top priority, reflecting its feature of being forward-looking, targeted, and effective. With  the benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously unleashed, the PBC  improved regulations over deposit rates, promoted explicit indications of annualized  loan rates, safeguarded the sound competitive order in the market, and guided actual  loan rates to remain generally stable with a decline, compared with the historical lowest  level of 2020.  The PBC promoted financial institutions to improve application of the LPR  pricing mechanism and continuously released the potential of the LPR reform.  Banks were guided to incorporate the LPR into their internal funds transfer pricing (FTP)  so as to strengthen the benchmark role of the LPR in their internal and external pricing.  Up until now, all nationwide financial institutions have established relevant rules and  systems of FTP and have continuously improved their loan FTP mechanisms pegged to  the LPR, through which movement of the LPR may be promptly transferred to loan  rates. Locally incorporated financial institutions continuously improved establishment  of the FTP mechanism, with 63 percent of these institutions setting up internal FTP  management systems, 14 percentage points more than before the LPR reform.  Regulations over deposit rates were improved, with bank liability costs basically  stable. On June 21, 2021, the self-disciplinary mechanism for setting interest rates  optimized determination of the self-disciplinary ceiling for deposit interest rates, which  had shifted from multiplying the benchmark deposit rates by a designated multiplier to  adding basis points to the benchmark interest rates. This modification has not only  safeguarded financial institutions鈥� right of independent pricing but it has also  contributed to orderly market competition. Deposits are guided to return to an  appropriate maturity structure, and the liability costs of banks have stabilized. Currently,  all financial institutions have put in place the relevant requirements of the self disciplinary mechanism for setting interest rates, and the new self-disciplinary ceiling  of interest rates has been implemented in a stable and orderly manner. In terms of  quoted interest rates, they remain basically unchanged for nationwide banks, while  some have been adjusted downwards for medium and long-term deposits by some local  financial institutions that still meet the requirements for the new self-disciplinary  ceiling of interest rates. In practice, within the self-disciplinary ceiling, banks may  independently negotiate with the depositors so as to determine their respective deposit  interest rates.  Explicit indications of annualized loan rates were promoted to safeguard the vital  interests of financial consumers. On March 31, 2021, the PBC issued Announcement  No. 3 [2021], requiring all institutions conducting lending businesses to explicitly  indicate their annualized loan rates, and it specified the calculation methodology.  Meanwhile, the PBC directed the National Internet Finance Association of China to  study the incorporation of annualized loan rates into national standards as mandatory  disclosure requirements. By end-June, 2021, banking institutions had all explicitly  indicated their annualized loan rates, and over 6,000 lending institutions as well as  major internet financial platforms had basically completed this task. In general, explicit  indications of annualized loan rates help borrowers understand actual borrowing costs  and they effectively safeguard the right of financial consumers to be informed.  Actual loan interest rates were generally stable with a decline. Currently, the  Chinese economy has improved steadily with sound momentum, and its growth rate  has basically returned to its potential level. Financial support for the real economy is  strong and solid, and the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE are basically in  line with nominal economic growth. This demonstrates that from a macro perspective,  interest rates remain at a reasonable level in China, which provides a favorable interest rate environment for steady economic operations and high-quality development. In H1  2021, the weighted average rate on loans registered 5.07 percent, down 0.07 percentage  points year on year and 0.08 percentage point compared with that of 2020, respectively.  In particular, interest rates on corporate loans witnessed a greater drop. In H1 2021, the  weighted average rate on corporate loans fell by 0.16 percentage points year on year to  4.63 percent, down 0.09 percentage points compared with that in 2020. The financing  costs of the real economy remained generally stable, albeit with a decline. In an  international comparison, although they were slightly higher than those in the major  advanced economies, the interest rates in China remain relatively low among the  developing countries and the emerging economies. In addition, from the perspective of  the actual interest rates for corporate lending, they are generally on par with the major  commercial banks of China and the US. In Q1 2021, the average corporate lending rate  of the four major commercial banks in the US (Citibank, Bank of America, Wells Fargo,  and JP Morgan) registered 4.03 percent, which was 4.04 percent of the four major  commercial banks in China (the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the  Agricultural Bank of China, Bank of China, and China Construction Bank).  Going forward, the PBC will perfect the market-oriented interest-rate formation and  transmission mechanism and improve the policy rate system of the central bank. It will  continue to unleash the potential of the LPR reform, smooth the transmission channels  for loan interest rates, optimize the allocation structure of financial resources, and  consolidate previous achievements in the reduction of loan interest rates. Meanwhile,  the PBC will optimize regulations over deposit interest rates, keep the banks鈥� liability  costs basically stable, and urge banks to transfer the policy benefits to the real economy  so as to further bring down the actual loan rates and to secure general stability with a  decline in the overall financing costs for MSBs.  VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism  The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and  to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and  demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It enhanced the RMB exchange rate  flexibility and gave play to the role of the exchange rate in adjusting the macro economy  and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The PBC attached  importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at  an adaptive and equilibrium level. In H1 2021, the highest and lowest RMB central  parities were 6.3572 and 6.5713, respectively, against the USD. During the 118 trading  days, the RMB appreciated on 62 days and depreciated on 56 days. The biggest intraday  appreciation and depreciation were 1.0 percent (648 bps) and 0.8 percent (543 bps),  respectively. The RMB exchange rates against the other major international currencies  floated in two ways. At end-June, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the  euro, and the Japanese yen appreciated 1.0 percent, 4.4 percent, and 8.2 percent,  respectively, from end-2020, while the RMB central parity against the pound had  depreciated 0.6 percent during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange  rate formation mechanism commenced in 2005, the RMB had appreciated by a  cumulative total of 28.1 percent, 30.3 percent, and 25 percent, respectively, against the  dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen by the end of June 2021. Direct RMB trading was  buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped  lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and  investment.  As of end-June, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and  foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of  RMB60.461 billion, and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD475  million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and  investment. Box 5 A Norm of Two-way Fluctuations of the RMB Exchange Rate  In recent years, with the continuous progress in the reform of the RMB exchange rate  formation mechanism, the market has played a decisive role in the formation of the  exchange rate. The RMB exchange rate fluctuates in two ways, both upward and  downward, and the exchange rate flexibility is increasing, creating conditions for  independent implementation of a normal monetary policy.  The current managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and  demand with reference to a basket of currencies is suitable for China鈥檚 conditions  and should be maintained for a long time, which is the basis for the two-way  fluctuations in the RMB exchange rate. A mix of measures adopted by the PBC  work as an integral whole so that the two-way fluctuations of the RMB exchange  rate have become a norm, and the RMB exchange rate is kept basically stable at  an adaptive and equilibrium level. First, the market plays a decisive role in the  formation of the exchange rate. The PBC has withdrawn from regular intervention in  the foreign exchange market. The exchange rate, determined by market supply and  demand, plays the role of a price signal, which improves the efficiency of resource  allocations. Second, the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has  been deepened. In October 2020, the counter cyclical factor faded out of the quotation  model of the RMB central parity against the USD. After the adjustment, the central  parity formation mechanism has become more transparent, benchmarking, and effective,  which also reflects that the market has been given full play in the self-discipline  mechanism of the foreign exchange market. Third, the macro-prudential management  framework for cross-border financing has been improved. Since 2020, in line with  macroeconomic conditions and the balance of payments, the PBC has adjusted the  macro-prudential parameter for cross-border financing of financial institutions and  enterprises and has expanded coverage of the macro-prudential management  framework for cross-border financing. Apart from raising management efficiency, the  PBC has also implemented differentiated policies according to the size of the financial  institutions, ensured the reasonable and orderly succession of policies, and guided  financial institutions to adjust the structure of their assets and liabilities in a market oriented manner. Fourth, expectation management has been emphasized. In the case of  large swings in the RMB exchange rate and market expectations, the PBC responded  actively to market concerns and communicated policy intentions with the market  through various channels so as to curb the overshooting of the foreign exchange market  and to safeguard the market鈥檚 sound operation. Fifth, liquidity in the foreign exchange  market has been adjusted effectively. On May 31, 2021, the PBC announced to raise  the reserve ratio for foreign exchange deposits of financial institutions by 2 percentage  points, from 5 percent to 7 percent. The adjustment was aimed at pumping out part of  the market liquidity and offsetting the impact of the external environment on the  domestic market. Sixth, enterprises and financial institutions have been guided to  establish the concept of 鈥渞isk neutrality.鈥� The PBC has guided financial institutions to  provide foreign exchange risk management services to enterprises in line with the  principle that foreign exchange management is based on real needs and should stick to  risk neutrality. Financial institutions have also been guided to maintain sound  operations in a bid to foster the stable and healthy development of the foreign exchange  market.  Beginning from 2020, the two-way fluctuations in the RMB exchange rate have  also reflected the differences in economic cycle and monetary policies at home and  abroad. In the midst of globalization, the economy and finance of various economies  are interacting with one another. The pandemic containment and economic recovery  have been advancing at different paces, and different monetary policies have been  adopted worldwide. The two-way fluctuation of the RMB exchange rate reflects that  the domestic and external economic cycles and monetary policies do not match one  another. In 2020, faced with the global economic impact of COVID-19, China stepped  up its macro-policy response and the PBC kept its sound monetary policy flexible,  appropriate, and targeted, all of which buttressed China鈥檚 leading role in pandemic  containment, resumption of work and production, and attainment of positive economic  growth. China鈥檚 monetary policy started to turn around to normal in May 2020, when  the pandemic was increasingly rampant elsewhere and ultra-loose monetary policies  were being adopted by the major economies. As a result, the RMB appreciated against  the USD and a basket of currencies. In 2020, the RMB central parity appreciated against  the USD by 6.9 percent, less than that of the euro, and the CEFTS index rose by 3.8  percent. Since the beginning of 2021, the COVID-19 vaccination has been making  progress in the developed economies, and reflation trade has been on the rise in the  market. The international financial market has been concerned that the US Fed may  reduce its quantitative easing and raise interest rates in advance. In June, the USD  appreciated against the major currencies, while China insisted on implementing its  normal monetary policies, with its economy operating near its potential growth rate.  The RMB depreciated by 1.4 percent against the USD in the same month, while the  CFETS index remained stable.  On the whole, the two-way fluctuation of the RMB exchange rate results from the  changes in domestic and external economic conditions, the balance of payments, and  the foreign exchange markets both at home and abroad. It reasonably reflects changes  in supply and demand in the foreign exchange market. It plays a role in adjusting the  macro economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments, promotes  both internal and external equilibria, and helps expand the space for implementation of  an independent monetary policy. In the future, it will continue to be a norm for the RMB  exchange rate to fluctuate in two ways, and the RMB may either appreciate or  depreciate, which cannot be accurately predicted by any single person. Going forward,  the PBC will maintain the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market  supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It will appropriately  employ multiple monetary policy tools, enhance macro-prudential management of  cross-border financing, reasonably guide expectations through various means, and help  enterprises and financial institutions establish the concept of 鈥渞isk neutrality鈥� so as to  keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.  IX. Promoting reform of financial institutions and resolution of financial risks in  a prudent and orderly manner  Risk resolution and reform and restructuring of small and medium-sized financial  institutions have been promoted in an orderly manner. Since the takeover of the  Baoshang Bank (BSB), there has been steady progress in various relevant tasks,  breaking the rigid payments in an orderly manner, and completing liquidation and asset  verification on schedule. On January 12, 2021, Beijing No.1 Intermediate People鈥檚  Court held a creditors鈥� meeting for the first time, and the administrator completed a  review of the claims of 743 creditors. On February 7, Beijing No.1 Intermediate  People鈥檚 Court issued its ruling on the BSB鈥檚 bankruptcy. Equities of former  shareholders were cleared, and large creditors bore partial losses. Risk resolution of the  BSB was basically completed, and the follow-up work was advanced in a steady and  orderly manner. Moreover, the reform and restructuring plan of Hengfeng Bank was  carried out smoothly, and the risk resolution, reform, and restructuring of Jinzhou Bank  was basically completed so as to ensure the sound operation of the financial system and  to firmly defend the bottom line so that no systemic risk should occur.  The reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously  deepened. The PBC advanced comprehensive reform plans for development and policy  financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scope, implement  classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms,  and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial  institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full  play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development  on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control.  X. Deepening reform of foreign exchange arrangements  Continue to strengthen positive incentives for trade facilitation pilot programs.  Persist in high standards when verifying the pilot conditions. Coverage of the  program was expanded in a steady and orderly manner and the pilot program was  further optimized. As of end-June 2021, the pilot program had been expanded to  incorporate 22 areas, 99 banks, and 909 enterprises.  New ideas for international trade management were explored. Based on the pilot  work in Hainan and other places regarding new international trade patterns, the PBC  has supported Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and other regions with actual needs to develop new  offshore international trade and it has guided banks to improve their capability to verify  compliance so as to facilitate real and legitimate business activities.  Two-way individual foreign exchange business was facilitated. The State  Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) issued the Notice on Further Promoting  Facilitation of Individual Foreign Exchange Business under the Current Account  (Huifa [2021] 13), aiming to improve the banks鈥� capability to handle complex  individual current-account businesses. The SAFE also issued the Individual Foreign  Exchange Business Manual (First Edition) so as to popularize knowledge about  individual foreign exchange policies. Moreover, the SAFE guided its Guangdong and  Shenzhen branches to launch pilot programs to facilitate cross-border insurance  exchange under the current account and to promote the interconnectivity of insurance  markets in Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macau.  Stable and sound operation of the foreign exchange market was maintained. The  PBC enhanced the timeliness and accuracy of off-site inspections and placed emphasis  on punishing illegal financial activities, such as underground banks and cross-border  gambling. Special investigations of key entities were conducted so as to effectively  deter foreign exchange market violations and to maintain an orderly foreign exchange  market. In H1 2021, a total of 1290 foreign exchange violations were investigated and  penalized, with total fines amounting to RMB375 million.  Part 3. Financial Market Conditions  In H1 2021, the financial market generally operated smoothly and steadily. Money  market interest rates remained stable with active market transactions. The bond market  featured generally declining bond coupon rates, increased bond issuances, and  decreased cash bond transactions. The stock market index rose, and both turnover and  the amount of funds raised witnessed year-on-year increases.  I. Financial market overview  1. Money market interest rates remained stable, and the growth of market  transactions slowed down  Money market interest rates were generally stable. In June, the monthly weighted  average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.17 percent, 16 basis points higher than  that in March. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond  repos among depository institutions posted 2.04 percent, 13 basis points lower than the  monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. In June, the monthly weighted  average interest rate for interbank lending posted 2.13 percent. At end-March, the  overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.18 percent and 2.41 percent, respectively.  Market transactions remain active. In H1 2021, the volume of bond repos trading on  the interbank market reached RMB471.4 trillion, representing an average daily turnover  of RMB3.9 trillion and almost on par with that in the previous year. The volume of  cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB58.1 trillion, with an average  daily turnover of RMB476.1 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 26.6 percent. In  terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 83.6 percent of the total  turnover in bond repos, decreasing 1.2 percentage points year on year, and overnight  lending made up 89.2 percent of interbank lending, down 1.4 percentage points year on  year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 21.6 percent  year on year to RMB156.2 trillion. Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses witnessed orderly  development. In H1 2021, 15,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market,  raising RMB10.9 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled  RMB70.8 trillion. At end-June, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB12.4 trillion.  In H1 2021, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.70  percent, 8 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 33,000  negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions in H1 2021, raising RMB6.2  trillion, with an increase of RMB200 billion year on year.  The turnover of interest rate swaps was stable. In H1 2021, the RMB interest rate swap  market witnessed 142,000 transactions, decreasing 1.9 percent year on year, with the  volume of the notional principal totaling RMB11.1 trillion, an increase of 12.7 percent  year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one  year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB8.0  trillion, accounting for 72.0 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing  repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the  RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 85.4 percent and 13.7 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In H1 2021, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 419 transactions, with RMB43.29 billion of the notional principal.  The loan prime rate (LPR) interest rate option business developed steadily. The LPR  interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market in March 2020, and  fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29,  2021. In H1 2021, a total of 266 interest rate option transactions were concluded,  totaling RMB46.66 billion. Specifically, 29 were interest rate swap transactions,  amounting to RMB1.52 billion of the notional principal, 237 were interest rate cap/floor  transactions, amounting to RMB45.14 billion of the notional principal, 199 were LPR  interest rate transactions, totaling RMB42.61 billion of the notional principal, and 67  were FDR interest rate transactions, amounting to RMB4.05 billion of the notional  principal.  2. Coupon rates of bonds declined while bond issuances expanded  On the whole, coupon rates of bonds declined. In June 2021, the yield on 10-year  government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 3.10 percent, 12 basis  points lower than that in March. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by  the China Development Bank (CDB) was 3.47 percent, 5 basis points lower than the  rate in March. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1)  issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.94 percent, 38 basis points higher than the rate  in March.  On the whole, government securities yields went down in H1. At end-June, yields on  1-year and 10-year government securities decreased by 4 basis points and 7 basis points  to 2.43 percent and 3.08 percent from end-2020, respectively; the spread between 1-  year and 10-year government securities was 65 basis points, down 2 basis points from  end-2020. Credit spreads narrowed at end-June, with yield spreads on 3-year AAA and  AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills and CDB bonds narrowing by 16 basis points and  40 basis points to 40 basis points and 101 basis points from end-2020, respectively.  Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In H1, the cumulative value of bond  issuances increased by 13 percent, or RMB3.4 trillion, year on year to RMB29.4 trillion,  most of which were interbank certificates of deposit, which increased by RMB3.1  trillion. At end-June, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB123.6 trillion,  an increase of 15 percent year on year.  The volume of spot bond transactions on the interbank market decreased, while the  exchange volume of spot trading continued to grow. In H1, the value of cash bonds  trading on the bond market posted RMB108.2 trillion, registering a decrease of 15.1  percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank  market was RMB96.7 trillion, representing a decrease of 19 percent year on year. The  value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB11.5 trillion, an  increase of 44 percent year on year. 3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates in the bill market were  basically stable  The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In H1, commercial drafts issued  by enterprises totaled RMB12.3 trillion, rising 5.3 percent year on year. At end-June,  outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.3 trillion, increasing by 1.0 percent year  on year. At end-June, outstanding commercial draft acceptances witnessed stable  growth, increasing by RMB250.4 billion from the beginning of this year and RMB252.9  billion from end-March, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers鈥� acceptances, 67.9  percent were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs).  Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In H1, total  discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB23.8 trillion, growing 7.6 percent  year on year. At end-June, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.6 trillion, down 0.1  percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.6 percent of total outstanding loans,  down 0.6 percentage points year on year. In H1, the interest rates of bill financing first  increased and then decreased, but they remained generally stable.  4. Stock indices rose, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year  on year  Driven by the economic recovery, stock indices experienced a choppy rise. At end-June,  the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,591 points, increasing by  3.4 percent from end-2020. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at  15,162 points, increasing by 4.8 percent from end-2020. Turnover on the stock markets  expanded. In H1, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the  Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB107.6 trillion, and the average daily turnover  was RMB912.0 billion, representing an increase of 20 percent year on year. The amount  of funds raised on the stock markets surged significantly year on year. In H1, a  cumulative RMB657.8 billion was raised, increasing by 97 percent year on year.  5. Growth of assets in the insurance sector and premium income slowed down  In H1 2021, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB2.9 trillion,  up 5.2 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.9 percentage points from the previous  year. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB765.1 billion, representing a year-on year increase of 21.3 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit  payments increased by 15.8 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and  benefit payments went up by 26.2 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-June 2021, total  assets in the insurance sector increased 12.7 percent year on year to RMB24.8 trillion,  a deceleration of 0.6 percentage point from end-2020. Specifically, bank deposits  decreased by 2.9 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 17.7 percent year  on year.  6. Turnovers of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions witnessed rapid  growth  In H1 2021, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions  registered USD5 trillion, an increase of 44.4 percent year on year. The cumulative  turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD9.3 trillion, an  increase of 26.7 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD  swap transactions posted USD6.2 trillion, accounting for 66.5 percent of the total swap  turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled  USD52.3 billion, rising 1.9 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair  transactions totaled USD608.9 billion, increasing by 97.4 percent year on year. In  particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 60.5  percent of total market share.  7. Gold prices first went up but then dropped In H1 2021, international gold prices closed at USD1,763 per ounce, representing a loss  of 5.9 percent from end-2020. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at  RMB365.82 per gram, decreasing by 6.2 percent from end-2020. In H1 2021, the  volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 18,400 tons, representing  a decrease of 45.5 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB6.96 trillion, a decrease  of 44.0 percent year on year.  II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets  1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market  To better serve market entities and actively respond to market needs, the PBC released  Announcement No. 4 [2021] of the People鈥檚 Bank of China (Revision of the  Announcement on Bond Trading and Circulation in the Interbank Bond Market). The  announcement further improved institutional arrangements and efficiency for bond  trading and circulation, thus enhancing the capability of the bond market to serve the  real economy. To be specific, first, it is clearly specified that infrastructure agencies  shall build direct connections among their systems to achieve an electronic transmission  of information. Second, issuers or lead underwriters are no longer required to provide  the National Interbank Funding Center (NIBFC) with a list of the initial bondholders  and their holdings. Third, the function of infrastructure agencies as intermediary service  providers has been strengthened.  2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures  industry  The institutional design of the capital market was improved. In April 2021, the CSRC  released the Decision on Revising the 鈥淕uidelines for the Evaluation of Sci-Tech  Innovation Attributes (for Trial Implementation), which focused on supporting the core  goals of hard technology and emphasizing substance over form, implementing  classified processing and negative list management and further enriching the evaluation  indicators of science and technology attributes, and strengthening comprehensive  research and judgment. The Guidelines urged intermediaries to shoulder due  responsibilities and reinforce the supervision and inspection of implementation of the  rules so as to improve the quality of companies listed on the Science and Technology  Innovation Board at their source. In May, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on  Improving the Rules for Delisting on the National Equities Exchange and Quotations.  The Guiding Opinions improved the basic institutional framework for both voluntary  and forced delistings, clarified the post-delisting regulatory arrangements, and  emphasized the responsibility of the exchange, thus promoting a more standardized  market exit mechanism.  Protection of legitimate rights and interests of investors was strengthened. In May 2021,  the CSRC released the Elements of Asset Management Product Introduction鈥擯art 2:  Asset Management Plan and Related Products Offered by the Securities and Futures  Operators, which introduced the basic elements for asset management plans and  relevant securities and futures products, including their definitions, classifications,  operating modes, and risks, thus making it more convenient for investors to understand  the risk and return characteristics of the products. In June, the CSRC released two codes  concerning the content and format of information disclosures of listed companies for  the purposes of regulating the compiling of periodic reports and information disclosures  of listed companies as well as for safeguarding the investors鈥� rights to be informed.  Construction of an information-based capital market was promoted. In June 2021, the  CSRC released the Settlement Participant Code for the Securities and Futures Industry  and four other industry standards for the financial sector in order to encourage the  standardization of data and the exchange of information within the sector.  3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market  An exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot was launched. In May 2021, the  CBIRC released the Notice on Exclusive Commercial Pension Insurance Pilots and it  decided to launch an exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot in Zhejiang  Province (including Ningbo City) and Chongqing Municipality for one year starting on  June 1, 2021. The PICC Life Insurance Company Limited and five other life insurance  companies were to carry out the pilot work. The Notice specified the methods of  payment, design of the accumulation period and annuitization period, the insurance  liabilities, rules for insurance cancellation, information disclosures, and product  management. It also made clear the regulatory support policies with respect to equity  asset allocations and the minimum capital requirement.  Corporate governance of insurance companies was improved. In June 2021, the CBIRC  released the Code of Corporate Governance of Banking and Insurance Institutions. The  Code, for the first time at the level of regulatory institutions, put forward general  requirements for the integration of the leadership of the CPC and corporate governance,  and they made clear that CPC organizations in private institutions shall be actively  availed of as political centers. The Code improved the regulatory rules for the corporate  governance of banking and insurance institutions, clarified the responsibilities of  corporate governance bodies, and further standardized operation of the corporate  governance mechanism.  Regulatory requirements for the recovery and resolution plans of insurance institutions  were improved. In June 2021, the CBIRC released the Interim Measures on  Implementing the Recovery and Resolution Plans of Banking and Insurance Institutions.  The Interim Measures specified key elements and the implementation process for the  recovery and resolution plans as well as regulatory management covering resolvability  assessment by regulatory authorities, the improvement of resolvability, and so forth.  The Interim Measures stressed that the recovery and resolution plans shall insist on  using the institution鈥檚 own assets, shareholder assistance, or other market-based  channels to raise funds to carry out a self-rescue, aiming at making institutions assume  primary responsibility and shareholders assume corresponding responsibility, and  avoiding moral hazards.  Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview  I. Global economic and financial developments  In Q2, the global economy on the whole continued to recover, but economic  performance diverged remarkably across regions. The labor market recovered slightly,  and inflation expectations rose remarkably amid the new uncertainties brought about  by the resurgence of the pandemic in many countries. In the future, evolution of the  pandemic will remain the fault line for a global economic recovery. In addition,  persistent high inflation, a possible acceleration of shifts in the monetary policy stances  of the major advanced economies, increased cross-border capital flows, and sharper  volatility of exchange rates and financial markets in the global economies, especially  in the emerging economies, also merit our attention.  1. Economic performance and financial markets of the major economies  The global economy on the whole maintained a momentum for recovery, but  divergences across regions were exacerbated. Among the advanced economies, the US  economic recovery showed a sound momentum as its annualized quarterly rate of GDP  in Q2 reached 6.5 percent and its Manufacturing and Services PMI in June registered  high levels of 60.6 and 60.1, respectively. In the euro area, the annualized quarterly rate  of GDP in Q2 reached 8.3 percent, and the Manufacturing PMI in June hit a record high  of 63.4. In Japan, the annualized quarterly rate of GDP in Q1 contracted to -3.9 percent,  and the Manufacturing PMI edged down to 52.4 in June. Among the emerging  economies, Brazil and India, both of which were severely affected by the pandemic,  witnessed year-on-year quarterly GDP growth of 0.96 percent and 1.64 percent,  respectively, in Q1. In India, the Manufacturing and Services PMI in June dipped to  48.1 and 41.2, respectively.  The resurgence of the pandemic posed a new challenge to prospects for an economic  recovery. Since March, the pandemic has rebounded in many countries, with the  number of single-day newly confirmed cases surpassing the 900,000 mark in April and  still standing at around 400,000 at end-June. Virus mutations and some countries鈥�  reopening of their economies despite the ongoing pandemic were the major reasons for  the resurgence of the pandemic. The delta variant, which is more contagious than the  previous variants, has been found in at least 98 countries and regions and has become  the prevalent strain in many countries. As a result, pressure for global pandemic  containment is mounting.  Recovery of the labor market was slow. The US unemployment rate registered 5.9  percent in June, edging up from 5.8 percent in May, which indicated that there was still  a long way to go for the job market to return to pre-pandemic levels. The labor  participation rate remained at the low level of 61.6 percent, while job vacancies in June  were over 2 million more than the average level in 2019, demonstrating a lack of  motivation for the unemployed to resume work and the existence of prominent  structural problems, such as the coexistence of difficulties in finding both employees  and employers. Unemployment rates in the euro area in June and the UK in May also  stood at high levels of 7.7 percent and 4.8 percent, respectively. According to the  projections of the International Labour Organization, global unemployment will stand  at no less than 220 million in 2021 and the labor market will not return to pre-pandemic  levels until 2023.  Elevated inflation was common across the globe. In the US, the year-on-year (y-o-y)  growth rate of the CPI increased to 5.4 percent in June, and that of the core CPI posted  4.5 percent, hitting a record high since 1992. In the euro area, the Harmonized Index of  Consumer Prices (HICP) grew by 1.9 percent year on year in June, standing at around  the policy target of 2 percent for two consecutive months. In Japan, deflation pressures  eased slightly, and the CPI in June grew by 0.2 percent year on year, turning positive  for the first time in nine months. Compared with the CPI, the PPI rose more notably. In  June, the PPI in the US and Japan grew by 7.3 percent and 5.0 percent year on year,  respectively, while that in the euro area grew more notably by 10.2 percent. Inflation  pressures also mounted in some emerging economies, with the IPCA of Brazil and the  CPI of Russia growing by 8.4 percent and 6.5 percent year on year, respectively, in June. In terms of the global economic recovery, there was a mismatch between supply and  demand, the prospects for recovery were precarious, market expectations diverged, and  financial markets became more volatile. Commodity prices continued to surge in Q2,  and they became more volatile in July. In Q2, the futures price of Brent crude oil  increased by 16.6 percent, and the futures prices of aluminum and copper in the London  Metal Exchange (LME) increased by 13.3 percent and 7.2 percent, respectively.  International oil prices fluctuated, rebounding after a remarkable drop in mid-July.  Treasury yields underwent adjustments in the advanced economies. Ten-year Treasury  yields in the US dropped from 1.74 percent at end-March to 1.45 percent at end-June,  while those in Germany went up to a high of -0.09 percent in May from -0.27 percent  at end-March and then dropped to -0.23 percent at end-June. On the whole, the stock  markets in the major economies rose, but the volatility increased.  2. Monetary policies of the major economies  Central banks in the major advanced economies maintain accommodative monetary  policy stances. In Q2, the US Fed kept policy rates and the scale of asset purchases  unchanged, but the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in June discussed the  issue of tapering asset purchases. According to the dot-matrix plot, seven out of  eighteen FOMC members projected that policy rates would increase in 2022. The  FOMC in June also made technical adjustments to increase both the interest rate paid  on excess reserve balances and the overnight reverse repo rate by five basis points. The  European Central Bank kept policy rates unchanged and reiterated that it would  accelerate asset purchases, revise the monetary policy framework, and make an  adjustment to adopt a symmetric 2 percent inflation target over the medium term. The  Bank of Japan maintained its current monetary policy and will release plans that  encourage financial institutions to respond to climate changes.  Some emerging market economies began to increase policy rates in response to the  pressures of inflation, capital outflows, and a currency depreciation. Since the  beginning of 2021, the central banks of Russia and Brazil increased policy rates four  Unemployment Rate  (%)  2.6  2.8  2.8  2.9  3.0  3.0  3.1  3.0  3.0  2.9  2.9  2.6  2.8  3.0  2.9  CPI (year-on-year, %) 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.2  0.0  -0.4  -0.9  -1.2  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2  -0.4  -0.1  0.2  NIKKEI 225 (end of  the period)  20194 21878  22288 21710 23140 23185 22977  26434 27444 27663 28966 29179 28813 28860 28792times and three times, respectively, those in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Georgia, and other  countries increased policy rates twice, and those in Mexico, Turkey, Chile, and other  countries increased policy rates once. Against this backdrop, monetary policies  diverged among some emerging economies and advanced economies, which may have  an impact on an economic resurgence and may exacerbate imbalances in the global  economic recovery.  3. Issues that merit attention  First, the global economic recovery may be stalled by recurrent shocks from the  pandemic. Since March, the spread of Covid-19 variants at a faster pace in many  countries has led to a resurgence of the pandemic, which has been a drag on economic  recovery and has dampened market confidence to some extent. In the meantime, with  most developing countries facing vaccine shortages, there is a disparity in vaccination  progress across the globe, which may exacerbate the dual divergence of pandemic  containment and economic recovery.  Second, there is still a mismatch between supply and demand, and it remains to be seen  whether inflation will continue to rise. During the pandemic, ultra-loose monetary  policies adopted by the major advanced economies led to ample market liquidity and  substantial currency growth. In parallel, the pickup in demand outpaced that of supply  in the economic recovery, leading to chip shortages, and freight rates continued to hit  record highs. These have exerted upward pressures on commodity and durable prices.  As a result, short-term increases in global inflation have become a reality. However,  there are still big differences of opinion about whether inflation will continue over the  longer term, which requires close attention.  Third, the shifts in the monetary policies of the major advanced economies may have  spillovers and cause a spread of risks. In addition to increasing inflation pressures, huge  fiscal and monetary policy stimuli since the outbreak of the pandemic have also  spawned bubbles in asset prices, caused a deviation in financial markets from the real  economy, and increased vulnerability. An acceleration of monetary policy shifts in the  major advanced economies in the future may result in adjustments in the valuation of  financial markets, add to pressures on capital outflows and currency depreciation in  most emerging economies, and increase the risks of debt repayments and refinancing.  54II. Macroeconomic developments in China  In H1 2021, achievements to coordinate pandemic containment and economic and  social development in all regions and departments across the country were consolidated  and expanded. China鈥檚 economy sustained a steady recovery, production demand  continued to recover锛宎nd employment and consumer prices were generally stable. The  national economy witnessed steady and sound development. According to preliminary  statistics, GDP in H1 stood at RMB53.2167 trillion, growing by 12.7 percent year on  year on a comparable basis and the average growth rate of GDP during the past two  years was 5.3 percent. GDP in Q2 grew by 7.9 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate of GDP during the past two years was 5.5 percent, an acceleration of 0.5  percentage points from Q1.  1. Consumption gradually improved, investments continuously rebounded, and  imports and exports recorded rapid growth.  Residents鈥� income grew steadily and people鈥檚 willingness to consume improved. In H1,  the country鈥檚 per capita disposable income increased by 12.6 percent year on year in  nominal terms, or 12.0 percent in real terms, with the average growth rate during the  past two years at 5.2 percent. The increase in residents鈥� income kept pace with economic  growth. The income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents, and the  structure of income distribution continuously improved. According to the Urban  Depositors鈥� Survey conducted by the PBC in Q2, 25.1 percent of residents were inclined  to 鈥渃onsume more,鈥� up 2.8 percentage points from Q1. In H1, total retail sales of  consumer goods grew by 23.0 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during  the past two years was 4.4 percent, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage points from Q1.  Investments rebounded steadily and the structure continued to improve. In H1, total  fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households)  increased by 12.6 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during the past two  years registered 4.4 percent, accelerating 1.5 percentage points from Q1. In terms of  sectors, year-on-year growth of investments in the manufacturing sector was 19.2  percent, 6.6 percentage points higher than that of total investments, and the average  growth rate was 2.0 percent during the past two years. Investments in infrastructure  increased by 7.8 percent, and the average growth rate during the past two years  registered 2.4 percent. Investments in real estate development increased by 15.0 percent,  and the average growth rate during the past two years registered 8.2 percent.  Investments in the high-tech industry saw sound growth and grew by 23.5 percent year on year in H1, and the average growth rate during the past two years registered 14.6  percent, an acceleration of 4.7 percentage points from Q1. Private investment recovered  steadily, growing by 15.4 percent year on year in H1, and the average growth rate during  the past two years was 3.8 percent, an acceleration of 2.1 percentage points from Q1.  Imports and exports continued to grow rapidly. In H1, imports and exports of goods  grew by 27.1 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 28.1 percent year on  year, while imports grew by 25.9 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods  posting RMB1.6336 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve. In H1, the share  of exports of machinery and electronics increased by 0.6 percentage points year on year.  The share of imports and exports under general trade increased by 1.7 percentage points  year on year. The share of imports and exports by private enterprises increased by 2.8  percentage points year on year.  The expectations and confidence of foreign direct investments (FDI) were stable with  promising signs. In H1, actually utilized FDI increased by 28.7 percent year on year to  RMB607.84 billion, which was 27.1 percent higher than that in the same period of 2019.  Actually utilized FDI in the service industry totaled RMB482.77 billion, up 33.4  percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 39.4  percent year on year, among which FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 42.7  percent year on year and FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 29.2  percent year on year.  2. Agricultural production saw another bumper harvest, industrial production  grew steadily, and the service industry recovered continuously  In H1 2021, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by  7.8 percent, 14.8 percent, and 11.8 percent year on year, respectively. The average  growth rate of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries was 4.3 percent, 6.1  percent, and 4.9 percent, respectively, during the past two years.  Agricultural production grew steadily, and China saw another bumper grain harvest this  summer. In H1, the value-added of agriculture grew by 3.6 percent year on year, an  acceleration of 0.3 percentage point from Q1, and the average growth rate was 3.7  percent during the past two years. In H1, the output of summer grains increased by 2.1  percent year on year. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 23.0 percent year on year. Hogs in stock increased by 29.2 percent year on year at end-June.  Industrial production increased steadily, and the industrial structure was continuously  optimized. In H1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size  (IEDS) increased by 15.9 percent year on year and the average growth rate during the  last two years registered 7.0 percent, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage point from Q1.  Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 6.2 percent year on year,  and the average growth rate during the last two years registered 2.5 percent. The  manufacturing sector increased by 17.1 percent year on year, and the average growth  rate during the last two years registered 7.5 percent. The electricity, heat, gas and water  production and supply sectors increased by 13.4 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate during the last two years registered 6.0 percent. The industrial structure was  continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector  increased by 22.6 percent year on year, with the average growth rate posting 13.2  percent during the past two years. In terms of products, the average growth rates of new  energy cars, industrial robots, and integrated circuits all exceeded 30 percent,  respectively.  Growth in the services industry continued to recover, and market expectations improved.  In Q2, the value-added of the tertiary industry grew by 8.3 percent year on year, and  the average growth rate was 5.1 percent during the past two years. In June, the Index of  Service Production (ISP) increased by 10.9 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate registered 6.5 percent during the past two years. From January to May, the  revenue of Service Enterprises Above a Designated Size (SEDS) increased by 31.9  percent year on year and the average growth rate during the last two years registered  11.1 percent, which was 0.2 percentage point higher than that from January to April.  The Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 52.3 percent, remaining  above a critical point for sixteen consecutive months.  3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and producer prices rose greatly  Consumer prices increased moderately. In H1, the CPI increased by 0.5 percent year on  year, an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points from Q1. The CPI in April, May, and June  increased by 0.9 percent, 1.3 percent, and 1.1 percent year on year respectively, and the  core CPI (food and energy excluded) increased by 0.4 percent year on year. As hog  production gradually recovered and the supply of pork continued to increase, the  decline in pork prices expanded, dropping by 19.3 percent year on year in H1. As  Covid-19 prevention and control improved and the suppressed service demand  continuously recovered, the growth of non-food prices rebounded, increasing by 0.7  percent year on year in H1.  Producer prices rose greatly. In H1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 6.8  percent year on year, an acceleration of 4 percentage points from Q1. The growth rate  of PPI in April, May, and June registered 6.8 percent, 9.0 percent, and 8.8 percent,  respectively. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by  7.1 percent year on year, accelerating by 4.3 percentage points from Q1. The Corporate  Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC increased by 5.7 percent year on year,  accelerating by 2.5 percentage points from Q1.  4. Fiscal revenue experienced rapid growth  In H1 2021, revenue in the national general public budget increased by 21.8 percent  year on year to RMB11.7 trillion, accounting for 59.3 percent of annual revenue in the  budget. Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 23.2 percent and 20.6  percent year on year, respectively.  In H1 2021, expenditures in the national general budget saw an increase of 4.5 percent  year on year to RMB12.2 trillion, accounting for 48.6 percent of annual expenditures  in the budget. Specifically, central fiscal expenditures experienced a marginal drop of  6.9 percent year on year, while local fiscal expenditures edged up by 6.4 percent year  on year.  5. The employment situation remained generally stable  In H1 2021, 6.98 million people were newly employed, accounting for 63.5 percent of  the annual employment goal. In June, the surveyed urban unemployment rate was 5.0  percent, on par with that in May and down 0.7 percentage point year on year. The  surveyed urban unemployment rate in 31 major cities was 5.2 percent, on par with that  in May. The average weekly working hours of employees in enterprises were 47.6 hours,  increasing by 0.3 hours month on month.  6. The balance of payments and the external debt  A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. According to  preliminary statistics, in H1 2021 China鈥檚 current account surplus registered USD122.2  billion. Specifically, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD230.6 billion, whereas  trade in services recorded a deficit of USD43.8 billion. The capital and financial  account deficit was USD122.3 billion. Specifically, direct investments recorded a  surplus of USD123.7 billion. At end-June 2021, foreign exchange reserves posted  USD3.2140 trillion, up 1.4 percent, or USD44.0 billion from end-March. At end-March,  the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign  currencies) posted USD2.5266 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt  balance was USD1.3987 trillion, accounting for 55 percent of the total external debt  balance.  7. Analysis by sector  7.1 The real estate sector  In H1 2021, housing prices in China remained generally stable. In June, among 70  medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built residential housing prices  increased by 4.3 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.1 percentage points from March,  and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 3.5 percent year on year,  accelerating by 0.2 percentage points from March. Due to the low base figure in the  previous year, housing sales and investments in real estate development experienced  relatively rapid year-on-year growth. In H1, total floor area of sold units increased by  27.7 percent year on year, registering average growth of 8.1 percent during the past two  years. Housing sales increased by 38.9 percent year on year, registering average growth  of 14.7 percent during the past two years. In H1, investments in real estate development  grew by 15 percent year on year, registering average growth of 8.2 percent during the  past two years. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 17  percent year on year, registering average growth of 9.6 percent during the past two years  and accounting for 75.2 percent of total investments in real estate development.  On the whole, growth of real estate loans remained stable. At end-June, outstanding real  estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial  institutions) grew by 9.5 percent year on year to RMB50.8 trillion, a deceleration of 1.4  percentage points from end-March. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans  grew by 13 percent year on year to RMB36.6 trillion, a deceleration of 1.5 percentage  points from end-March. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 3.4 percent  year on year to RMB9.4 trillion, a deceleration of 2.4 percentage points from end March.  7.2 Transformation and development of the coal industry toward achieving a  carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060  The supply-side reform in the coal industry made remarkable progress, which  established a solid foundation for adjustment of the energy structure and the transition  to low carbon development toward achieving a carbon emissions peak before 2030 and  carbon neutrality before 2060. During the 13th Five-Year Plan period from 2016 to  2020, the coal industry enjoyed a shift from extensive growth focusing on quantity and  speed to intensive development focusing on quality and benefits, basically forming a  supply pattern with an advanced production capacity as the mainstay. Arrangements for  coal exploitation continued to improve, with enhanced capability to secure a stable  supply. In 2020, the output of raw coal in Shanxi, Shaanxi, and Inner Mongolia added  up to 2.79 billion tons, accounting for 71.5 percent of total output in China, and the 14  major coal bases produced 96.6 percent of the coal in China. Structural adjustments in  the coal industry made new progress with a remarkably higher degree of industrial  concentration. At end-2020, a total of 5,500 collieries ceased to operate and the  shutdown of outdated coal production capacity exceeded one billion tons per year. The  number of collieries operating nationwide shrank to less than 4,700, with the top eight  producers producing 47.6 percent of total raw coal in China. Clean and efficient use of  coal has accelerated. Remarkable results were achieved in the comprehensive  management of scattered coal as well as in the reduction and replacement of coal use  with alternative energy sources. At end-2020, the installed capacity that had undergone  low-emission and energy-savings transformation in coal-fired power plants across  China reached 950 million kilowatts, accounting for 76 percent of the total installed  capacity of coal-fired power plants nationwide. The scattered coal consumption was  reduced by more than 200 million tons in the "Thirteenth Five-Year Plan" period.  For the coal industry, opportunities and challenges will coexist in the 14th Five-Year  Plan period from 2021 to 2025. Toward achieving its carbon emissions peak before  2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060, stricter measures will be taken to control the  aggregate and intensity of coal consumption, and the proportion of coal in primary  energy consumption will continue to fall. However, some deep-rooted problems in the  coal industry that have been accumulating for a long time are yet to be solved, including  unbalanced productivity development in the industry, some enterprises still running at  a loss, and salient structural problems in coal production and coal products. Hence,  there is much pressure for a low-carbon transformation of the coal industry.  All in all, the function of coal-fired power as the last resort needs to be consolidated. In  the future, the coal industry should adapt to the new stage of development, building up  a new development paradigm for its production chain and supply chain as follows. First,  it needs to continuously improve arrangements in coal exploitation, make clear the  function of grand bases through reasonable classification, and enhance capability to  safeguard the power supply. Second, it should phase out excess production capacity,  shut down outdated production facilities, and build up advanced production facilities in  a way that improves coordination in the coal production chain. Third, it should promote  clean production and the clean and efficient use of coal and accelerate the shift toward  smart production, information-based management, a specialized division of labor, and  clean use of coal.  Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook  I锛嶰utlook for the Chinese economy  Since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and  economic and social development, and the economy has continued recovering and  improving steadily. In Q2, GDP saw a year-on-year growth of 7.9 percent, with the  growth rate averaging 5.5 percent during the past two years, which was 0.5  percentage points higher than that in Q1. In the medium and long term, China鈥檚  development will still be at an important phase of strategic opportunities, and the  fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run and high-quality  development will remain unchanged.  China's economy has continued to recover, and the momentum for growth has  been further enhanced. In Q2, the quality and efficiency of industrial production  improved, exports maintained fairly fast growth, investment and consumption sustained  steady recovery, the employment situation was generally stable, and market  expectations remained stable. All of these have established a good foundation for  economic performance in the second half of the year. The sound monetary policy has  maintained continuity, stability, and sustainability, and significant achievements have  been made in managing market expectations in a scientific way, serving the real  economy, preventing and controlling financial risks, and keeping the macro leverage  ratio basically stable. The RMB exchange rate is expected to be stable, and it has been  moving in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing the role of a  macroeconomic stabilizer.  It should also be noted that the global pandemic continues to evolve, the external  environment is becoming more severe and complex, and the domestic economic  recovery remains unstable and imbalanced. The orderly vaccination has generally  boosted the global economic outlook, with the IMF and the World Bank in Q2 both  raising their global economic growth forecasts for 2021. However, with the recent  rampage of coronavirus variants in many countries and the resurgence of COVID-19  cases in several economies, there is still uncertainty about the future evolution of the  pandemic. The spillover effect of the ultra-loose monetary policy in the major  developed economies has become increasingly apparent, leading to significantly higher  inflation. If the pace of their monetary policy shifts accelerates, it may cause global  cross-border capital flows and exchange rate volatility to increase and financial market  valuations to adjust significantly. Domestically, the foundation for an economic  recovery is not yet solid as export growth may slow down due to the high base effect,  investment growth in some areas is relatively weak, contact-based consumption such  as catering and tourism have not been fully restored, and the sustainability of the  momentum for economic growth faces certain challenges. Enterprises鈥� operating costs  are pushed up as commodity prices rise sharply, bringing great difficulties especially to  some micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Close attention should be  paid to the pressure of a rebound of non-performing assets and shadow banking while  the medium and long-term challenges, such as the decline in potential economic growth  rate, the accelerating aging of the population and green transformation should not be  overlooked. Therefore, it is necessary to be confident and face up to the difficulties.  The PBC will focus on fulfilling its responsibilities by properly handling the  relationship between reforms and macro management, short-term and long-term  considerations, as well as internal and external equilibria in a bid to achieve high quality development.  The CPI is rising moderately and the PPI is rising temporarily. Overall, inflation  pressures are controllable, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or  deflation. In Q2 2021, under the combined effects of the resumption of travel by  residents, rising gas and diesel prices, and falling pork prices, the CPI was at a low level  of about 1 percent, and was expected to move smoothly within a reasonable range in  the second half of the year. At the same time, due to rising commodity prices and the  low base effect, PPI growth has accelerated, which should be viewed historically and  objectively. On the one hand, as it is a high reading upon the low base of last year, the  change in the PPI can be viewed from an overall perspective based on the figures from  last year, this year, and next year; on the other hand, historically the PPI has witnessed  relatively large fluctuations, and it is not rare that it temporarily underwent a  considerable drop or a surge within a few months. Overall, the rise of China's PPI is  most probably temporary, and the PPI may remain relatively high in the short term. In  the future when the base effect subsides and global supplies gradually recover, the PPI  is likely to fall. In the medium and long term, the decline in labor productivity growth  and the aging population will curb inflation, while the explicit pricing of carbon  emissions will push up prices to some extent, hence being conducive to price stability.  As China's economy is improving steadily and a normal monetary policy has been  maintained since the outbreak of the pandemic last year, domestic aggregate supply and  demand are basically stable, which is conducive to keeping prices stable. Therefore,  there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation.  II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage  In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism  with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines of  the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic  Work Conference and will put into practice the requirements set forth in the Report on  the Work of the Government. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC  Central Committee and the State Council, it will adhere to the general principle of  pursuing progress while ensuring stability, apply the new development philosophy fully,  faithfully, and comprehensively, deepen the supply-side structural reform, accelerate  the building of a new development paradigm, and promote high-quality development.  The PBC will work to align this year and next year鈥檚 macro policies in a coordinated  way, maintain the stability of monetary policy, enhance its foresightedness and  effectiveness, and firmly refrain from adopting indiscriminate stimulus measures. By  doing so, it will continue to focus on providing support for the real economy to help  sustain the recovery of small and medium-sized enterprises and industries in difficulties  and to keep the major economic indicators within a reasonable range. With these efforts,  we will get off to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period and the economy will  see sound and sustained growth for the long term.  The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate,  giving top priority to stability. The PBC will remain committed to conducting a normal  monetary policy and attach importance to cross-cycle policy design. The autonomy of  macro policies will be enhanced,, with policy intensity and pace aligned with the  domestic economic situation and price movements. The PBC will properly handle the  relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention to keep the economy  generally stable and to strengthen the resilience of economic development. It will build  a modern central banking system while improving the modern monetary policy  framework and the mechanism for money supply management. It will keep liquidity  adequate at a reasonable level so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate  financing to the real economy (AFRE) are basically in line with nominal economic  growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. Closely following  and studying price movements, the PBC will stabilize social expectations and keep  prices generally stable. In an effort to bring into play the guiding role of structural  monetary policy tools, it will work effectively to implement the decision to extend the  expiration dates of the two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real  economy, and it will issue central bank lendings to provinces with slow credit growth.  Moreover, the PBC will take steps to put into operation the support instruments for  carbon emissions reduction, ramp up support for inclusive finance, and guide financial  institutions to intensify support for sectors such as sci-tech innovation, micro and small  businesses (MSBs), green development, and manufacturing. It will enhance the market oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by further unleashing the  potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, improving the central bank policy rate  system, optimizing regulation over deposit rates, and bringing down actual loan rates.  It will deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, enhance the RMB exchange  rate flexibility, stabilize market expectations, strengthen macro-prudential management  of cross-border financing, and guide enterprises and financial institutions to always be  risk-neutral, thereby keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and  equilibrium level. With the aim of firmly defending the bottom line that no systemic  risk should occur, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early  warning, resolution, and accountability, set up a long-term mechanism for forestalling  and defusing financial risks, and replenish the capital of small and medium-sized banks  based on their conditions.  First, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth in money and credit as well as in  the AFRE. It will improve the mechanism for money supply management by enhancing  the long-term mechanisms of liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints with which  the central bank adjusts money creation of commercial banks. The general valve of  money supply will be properly controlled so that the growth rates of money supply and  the AFRE will be basically in line with nominal economic growth and the macro  leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. A mix of monetary policy tools, such as the  Medium-term Lending Facility, open market operations, central bank lending, and  central bank discounts, will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and  to guide market rates to move around policy rates. Moreover, the PBC will reinforce  monitoring and analysis of uncertainties, such as fiscal revenue and expenditures,  government bond issuances, and monetary policy adjustments by the major economies,  to further improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of operations. At  the same time, it will manage policy intensity and pace in line with the development of  the economic and financial situations to provide strong support for the real economy. It  will improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment and prioritize support  for small and medium-sized banks in capital replenishment so that banks will be better  able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks.  Second, the PBC will move ahead with policy implementation to bring into play  the guiding role of structural monetary policy tools and will promote green low carbon development with the instrument supporting carbon emissions reduction.  It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable while effectively  implementing the decision on extending the expiration dates of the two monetary policy  tools providing direct support for the real economy. It will continue to provide inclusive  and sustained funding support for agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private  enterprises, and it will keep up the intensity of financial support for MSBs so that they  can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and safeguarding employment.  Additionally, it will issue central bank lendings to provinces with slow credit growth in  order to support coordinated development across regions. To help reach the aims of  peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality, the PBC will take steps to  put into operation the instruments supporting carbon emissions reduction, which will  provide low-cost funds for eligible financial institutions to support lending at  preferential interest rates to those areas that will significantly reduce carbon emissions.  It will guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development in line  with market-oriented principles, promote concepts such as green low-carbon life and a  circular economy to the public, and encourage social investment and financing in green  low-carbon fields.  Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective  financial support for the real economy. It will make coordinated efforts to promote  the integrated development of inclusive finance, green finance, sci-tech innovation  finance, and supply chain finance, and it will improve the system for providing financial  support for sci-tech innovation to foster a virtuous cycle among the financial sector, the  sci-tech sector, and industries. It will push for an adjustment and optimization of the  regional credit structure, step up financing support via the multi-tiered capital market,  and improve the regional financial environment. It will ensure that efforts to consolidate  the achievements in poverty eradication join up effectively with rural revitalization  efforts, for which it will continue to provide financial services and support. Emphasis  will also be placed on providing financial services for new types of agribusinesses and  stepping up financial support for key fields, such as food security and development of  the seed industry, to promote the modernization of agriculture and rural areas. Financial  institutions will be urged to optimize their internal resource allocations and policy  arrangements and to enhance the use of sci-tech approaches so that they will be better  able to provide financial services for MSMEs and a long-term mechanism will be  formed whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and  professionalism to provide loans. Moreover, the PBC will improve the system for the  management of carbon neutrality financial bonds to promote their well-regulated  development, and it will impose strict control over credit supply to energy-intensive  and high-emissions projects in order to push for their green transformation and  upgrading. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for  speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term  stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices,  housing prices, and expectations, and it will maintain the continuity, consistency, and  stability of real estate finance policies. It will also implement rules for prudential  management of real estate finance and increase financial support for the rental of  housing.  Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate  reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will enhance  the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by continuing  to unleash the potential of the LPR reform and improving the central bank policy rate  system to smooth the channels of interest rate transmission and further bring down  actual loan rates. It will optimize regulation over deposit rates, maintain fair  competition in the deposit market, and keep bank liability costs basically stable. In the  meantime, it will urge banks to transmit policy benefits to the real economy and will  increase competition in the MSB loan market so that MSBs can more easily receive  financing and their comprehensive financing costs will stabilize and fall. Taking steady  steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the  managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with  reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, and  bring into play the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an  automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. It will stabilize market expectations  and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.  The PBC will work on the development of the foreign exchange market. Guiding  enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial  institutions on the provision of services of exchange rate risk management for  enterprises with authentic needs based on the risk-neutral concept, thereby maintaining  the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. The PBC will  continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by launching the  pilot program of high-quality opening-up of cross-border trade and investment, further  facilitating use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, and steadily  advancing convertibility of the RMB under the capital account.  Fifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental system building in the financial  market to serve the real economy and to guard against market risks. Placing equal  emphasis on preventing risks and promoting development, it will continue to advance  high-quality development of the bond market. In an effort to strengthen the legal  system building in the bond market, the PBC will see that intermediary institutions fulfil  their responsibilities, and it will push for implementation of the requirements for  information disclosures regarding corporate credit bonds and improve the regulations  on credit ratings. In line with market-oriented and law-based principles, the PBC will  continue to put into practice the newly formed mechanisms for bond default resolution  and will crack down on debt evasion. Continued efforts will be made to enhance  fundamental system building in the capital market so as to better protect the interests  of investors and promote the stable and sound development of the capital market.  Sixth, the PBC will push ahead further with the reform of financial institutions  and it will continue to improve corporate governance and optimize financial  supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, it will deepen the reform of  large commercial banks and establish a modern financial enterprise system with  Chinese characteristics. Large banks will be guided to shift the focus of their services  to the primary level, while small and medium-sized banks will be encouraged to focus  on their main duties and businesses. With these efforts, the financial market is expected  to become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly  adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed. The reform of development  financial institutions and policy financial institutions will continue, with their  institutional framework improved according to the laws and regulations. Bank-specific  measures will be taken to start reform from incremental businesses and advance the  reform of existing businesses progressively and step by step. These measures are aimed  at carrying out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting,  gradually improving transparency, strengthening capital constraints as well as risk  management, enhancing incentives, and holding the institutions truly accountable. In  this way, the important role of development financial institutions and policy financial  institutions will be better brought into play in serving the real economy and supporting  national strategies.  Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early  warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism  to forestall and defuse financial risks. It will pay special attention to monitoring and  screening potential risks in key fields, act quickly to shore up weaknesses in the  regulatory framework, accelerate its work to improve the modern financial regulatory  system, and strengthen regulatory coordination. While effectively giving play to the  deposit insurance system, it will focus on early rectification and will further improve  the mechanism for professional and market-oriented risk resolution under the deposit  insurance system. The PBC will make every effort to defuse existing risks and to  contain any possible resurgence of risks. It will intensify efforts to write off non performing assets in the banking system, while capital replenishments for small and  medium-sized banks will be conducted based on their conditions. Moreover, the PBC  will push for implementation of the mechanism for fiscal and financial risk resolution  led by major local officials to stress the responsibilities of local governments for local  risk resolution, and it will urge actions to bring down the number of high-risk  institutions in the provinces of concern. It will also push for implementation of  mechanisms, such as financial risk information sharing and accountability for major  financial risks, to effectively prevent moral hazards. The PBC will work towards  financial risk prevention that is more forward-looking, broad-sighted, and preemptive  so as to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since 2021, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, following the guidelines of the Fifth and Sixth Plenary Sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference, and implementing the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government, the People's Bank of China (PBC) kept its sound monetary policy flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate. Money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) gained reasonable growth, the credit structure continued to improve, and overall financing costs steadily declined, thereby notably propelling high-quality development of the real economy. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In 2021, according to the requirement that 鈥渢he sound monetary policy should be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate,鈥� the PBC pursued stability as its top priority and implemented intertemporal policy designs. A variety of policy tools, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs) for liquidity provision were employed in a more forward-looking, flexible, and effective manner. In July and December, the PBC announced two RRR cuts, each of 0.5 percentage points, which released long-term funds of about RMB1 trillion and RMB1.2 trillion, respectively. Meanwhile, the PBC guided money market rates to move around the OMO rates by stabilizing market expectations in different ways. In 2021, the 7-day repo rates between depository institutions with government-backed bonds as the collateral in the interbank market (DR007) averaged 2.17 percent, close to the 7-day OMO rate at 2.2 percent, implying a further decline in the volatility of interest rates. At end-2021, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 2 percent, a high level for 2021 Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level.Box 1 Factors Influencing Liquidity in the Banking System and the Central Bank鈥檚 Liquidity Management Liquidity in the banking system mainly refers to excess reserves deposited by financial institutions in the central bank. It is influenced by a number of factors, including cash in circulation (M0), government deposits at the PBC, required reserves, net foreign assets held by the PBC, clients鈥� payment-settlement provisions held by payment institutions, etc. These factors have short-term and medium- to long-term impacts on liquidity. The latter is mainly caused by the following factors: the long-term growing trend of M0 led by economic and residential income growth; the part of government deposits with a steady increase; the increase in required reserves due to deposit creation as loans are issued in support of the real economy; and the growing trend of client provisions held by payment institutions. Meanwhile, the following factors contribute to the short-term impact. First, fluctuations in the fiscal deposits at the PBC. Their rapid rise reduces the liquidity of the banking system during peak tax periods (usually in the middle of a month) or when there are massive issues of government bonds. On the other hand, the concentrated fiscal expenditures at month/quarter/year-end boost liquidity. Second, a rise in the demand for cash during holidays. The public tend to withdraw large amounts of cash from banks on holidays, especially before the Spring Festival, causing liquidity in the banking system to temporarily drop by RMB1.5鈥�2 trillion and then to bounce back quickly as cash returns to the banking system after the Spring Festival. Third, temporary changes in required reserves as well as client provisions held by payment institutions. Based on analysis and projections of these short-term and medium- to long-term factors, the PBC undertakes a wide array of monetary policy tools, such as the required reserve ratio, the MLF, and open market operations to manage liquidity, so that liquidity remains adequate at a reasonable level, and supply and demand for each maturity is basically balanced. This guides market rates to move around the central bank鈥檚 policy rate. Based on their growth patterns, when addressing medium- to long-term factors, the PBC mainly uses the required reserve ratio and the MLF to increase medium- to long-term liquidity when and as appropriate so as to fully meet the demand for mediumto long-term liquidity that supports reasonable money and credit growth. In terms of short-term factors, while fully comprehending their historical patterns, the PBC uses tools such as open market operations for forward-looking and targeted marginal liquidity adjustment to iron out short-term factors and stabilize market expectations. In recent years, money market rates in China have stabilized. The weighted average rate on 7-day repos between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) fluctuated around the open market鈥檚 7-day reverse repo rate, with generally less volatility. When analyzing the liquidity conditions of the banking system, it is best to focus on the overall liquidity management framework other than particular factors. It is inappropriate to estimate the liquidity surplus or deficit by simply adding up short-term and long-term factors, or, furthermore, to assume that monetary policy instruments reaching maturity will have an influence and to judge liquidity conditions accordingly. In fact, under the current liquidity management framework, the PBC closely tracks market rates to conduct operations. Various monetary policy tools will be used flexibly to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, no matter how the factors influencing liquidity may change. Regarding maturing monetary policy tools, the PBC will properly arrange the pace of maturities and maintain inter-temporal liquidity management. Some maturing instruments will be rolled over in light of market developments to fully meet the reasonable demand for liquidity. From a market perspective, the most direct, accurate, and timely indicator of liquidity conditions is the market rate. Observations of the monetary policy stance should focus on policy rates such as rates on open market operations and the MLF, and on the overall movement of market rates during a certain period. It would be inappropriate to focus excessively on quantity factors including the quantity of liquidity and the size of open market operations.II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the annual corporate loan interest rate at a record low since the reform and opening up Growth of total credit was more stable. Amid positive factors for economic growth and flourishing loan demands at the beginning of 2021, the PBC guided financial institutions to stabilize the pace of loan issuances in the first half of the year, especially in the first quarter, so as to leave some room for uncertainties in the second half of the year. In the second half of the year, the domestic economy faced downward pressure, and credit demands slowed down sharply. In response, through the PBC鈥檚 forward guidance, financial institutions enhanced the stability of credit growth, coordinated cross-year credit policies, and consolidated financial support for the real economy. Thus, RMB loans achieved a stronger year-on-year increase in 2021. At end-2021, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 11.3 percent year on year to RMB198.5 trillion, increasing RMB20.1 trillion from the beginning of 2021, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB308.8 billion. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 11.6 percent year on year to RMB192.7 trillion, up RMB19.95 trillion from the beginning of 2021, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB315 billion. Loans grew by RMB7.7 trillion, RMB5.1 trillion, RMB4.0 trillion, and RMB3.2 trillion for each of the four quarters of 2021, respectively. Quarterly increments accounted for 38.5 percent, 25.5 percent, 19.9 percent, and 16.2 percent, respectively, which were basically flat with the previous year. The credit structure has been improving. At end-2021, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB9.2 trillion from the beginning of the year, accounting for 76.8 percent of total corporate loans. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector increased by 31.8 percent. In particular, the high-tech manufacturing sector witnessed a year-on-year increase of 32.8 percent. Outstanding inclusive loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) grew by 27.3 percent year on year to RMB19.2 trillion. These loans supported 44.56 million MSBs, rising 38 percent year on year.Box 2 Maintaining Stable Growth of Credit Aggregates Since the beginning of 2021, in line with the arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC has implemented a prudent monetary policy that is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. In the first half of the year, the PBC employed a mix of monetary policy instruments to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, made good use of central bank lending and two monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy, improved supervision of deposit rates, and guided financial institutions to maintain their support for the real economy. In the second half of the year, in response to the triple pressures on the economy, i.e., shrinking demand, supply shocks, and waning expectations, the PBC enhanced intertemporal adjustments, coordinated cross-year policies, and urged financial institutions to step up their support for the real economy so as to promote stable growth of credit aggregates and to keep economic performance within a reasonable range. First, keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The PBC injected liquidity into the market by RRR cuts, open market operations, and the MLF. In July 2021, a preemptive RRR cut of 0.5 percentage points was made, and approximately RMB1 trillion of long-term funds were unleashed, paving the way for the sustainable and stable economic recovery in the second half of the year. In December, the PBC cut the RRR by another 0.5 percentage points, which freed up about RMB1.2 trillion of long-term funds, effectively broadened the stable long-term funding source of financial institutions, and thus buttressed the development of the real economy in a better way. At the beginning of 2022, the PBC increased liquidity injections by the MLF and open market operations, creating a favorable liquidity environment for an appropriate growth of money and credit and a stable macro economy as a whole. Second, guiding financial institutions to step up their support for the real economy. The PBC held a meeting with financial institutions on the monetary and credit situation in August and December, respectively, guiding financial institutions to maintain stable growth in credit aggregates. The PBC made efforts to further improve the macro prudential assessment (MPA) framework and encouraged banks to increase their support for inclusive loans to MSBs as well as medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector. Central bank bills swap (CBS) operations were conducted on a regular basis to support banks to replenish capital through perpetual bond issuances, thereby further enhancing sustainability of the financial sector鈥檚 capacity to serve the real economyThird, giving full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy instruments. The structural monetary policy instruments have actively done a good job in providing additional financial support. At the beginning of 2021, RMB200 billion in central bank lending was added to support locally incorporated banks in areas with sluggish credit growth to expand lending. In September, the PBC increased central bank lending in support of micro, small, and medium-sized enterprise (MSME) financing by RMB300 billion. In November, the PBC launched the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and set up RMB200 billion worth of special central bank lending targeted for clean and efficient coal use, aiming to promote the development of clean energy, energy conservation, environmental protection, carbon reduction technology, clean and efficient use of coal and other relevant key areas, and to boost overall energy supply. In December, the two monetary policy instruments that directly support the real economy were converted into market-based policy tools in support of MSBs. These structural monetary policy instruments not only promoted optimization of the credit structure but also boosted the stable growth of credit aggregates. Fourth, steadily bringing down overall financing costs of enterprises. The role of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform has been brought into full play, the quality of quotes by LPR quoting banks have been improving, and financial institutions have been encouraged to use the LPR as a pricing reference for bank lending. The one-year LPR rate went down by 5 basis points in December 2021. In January 2022, both the oneyear MLF rate and the 7-day open market operation rate dropped by 10 basis points, while the one-year and over-5-year LPR rates declined by 10 basis points and 5 basis points, respectively, further bringing down actual lending rates. In December 2021, rates of central bank lending in support of agro-related businesses and MSBs were cut by 0.25 percentage points, marking stepped-up support for these sectors. The PBC also made significant achievements to improve the supervision of deposit interest rates. The self-regulatory ceiling for deposit interest rates has shifted from multiplying the benchmark deposit rates by a designated multiplier to adding the basis points to the benchmark interest rates. In the meantime, the PBC strengthened its management of non-local deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks. All these efforts contributed to reducing debt costs for banks. The PBC, together with the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) and other relevant departments, strived to reduce the overall financing costs of enterprises, especially MSBs, through multiple measures, including cutting interest rates, reducing fees, and launching a number of tools that could directly support the real economy. A series of policies and measures have achieved remarkable results. RMB loans saw an increase of RMB19.95 trillion in 2021, which surpassed that recorded in 2020 by RMB315 billion, indicating stable growth of credit aggregates. At end-2021, M2 and the AFRE witnessed year-on-year growth of 9 percent and 10.3 percent, respectively, which were basically in line with the nominal economic growth rate. As for the twoyear average, the growth rates of M2 and the AFRE in 2020 and 2021 were 9.5 percent and 11.8 percent, respectively, which were basically in line with or slightly higher than the two-year average nominal economic growth. Going forward, the PBC will continue to follow the guidelines of the Central Economic Work Conference. Pursuing stability as its top priority and seeking progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will continue to implement a prudent monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate, enhance intertemporal policy adjustments, and keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level through a mix of monetary policy instruments so as to maintain stable growth of credit aggregates and to keep the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE basically in line with nominal economic growth. The PBC continued to deepen the market-based reform of interest rates and to tap into the efficiency of the LPR reform. Play was given to the guiding role of the LPR, and the one-year LPR in December 2021 was decreased by 0.05 percentage points. In the meantime, the PBC optimized regulation of deposit rates and lowered the interest rate on central bank lending for rural development and MSBs by 0.25 percentage points, promoting a steady drop in the actual loan rates. In December, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.80 percent and 4.65 percent, respectively, with the one-year LPR down 0.05 percentage points and the over-five-year LPR on par with that in December 2020. The weighted average lending rate recorded 4.76 percent in December, a decline of 0.27 percentage points year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 5.19 percent, down 0.11 percentage points year on year. The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.04 percentage points year on year to 4.57 percent. The average corporate loan interest rate in 2021 was 4.61 percent, a drop of 0.1 percentage points from 2020 and 0.69 percentage points from 2019, reaching its lowest level in the past four decades of the reform and opening up. In December, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 67.75 percent, 6.98 percent, and 25.27 percent, respectively. Compared with 2021, the floating range of loan rates around the LPR as a whole moved downward.Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans declined slightly. In December, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.10 percent and 0.31 percent, down 0.06 and 0.28 percentage points from December 2020, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months both registered 1.11 percent, down 0.11 percentage points and 0.25 percentage points from December 2020, respectively. Deposits grew steadily. At end-2021, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions increased 9.3 percent year on year to RMB238.6 trillion, up RMB20.2 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an acceleration of RMB70.3 billion. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 9.3 percent year on year to RMB232.3 trillion, an increase of RMB19.7 trillion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of RMB32.3 billion. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD996.9 billion, an increase of USD107.7 billion from the beginning of 2021 and a deceleration of USD23.8 billion. III. Money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at a reasonable pace Money and credit aggregates maintained reasonable growth, providing strong support for the real economy. Outstanding M2 recorded RMB238.3 trillion at end-2021, increasing 9.0 percent year on year. Outstanding M1 and M0 registered RMB64.7 trillion and RMB9.1 trillion, respectively, increasing 3.5 percent and 7.7 percent year on year, respectively. The year of 2021 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB651 billion, which was RMB61.5 billion less than that in the previous year. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB314.13 trillion at end-December. Year-on-year growth registered 10.3 percent, decelerating 3 percentage points compared to the growth recorded at end-2020. The AFRE increment in 2021 totaled RMB31.35 trillion, dropping RMB3.44 trillion year on year. Growth of money supply and the AFRE featured the following: first, loans issued by financial institutions to the real economy maintained stable growth. In 2021, loans issued to the real economy denominated in both RMB and foreign currencies increased by RMB20.11 trillion, which was on par with 2020 and RMB3.36 trillion more than that in 2019. Second, debt financing returned to normal, while equity financing exhibited a significantly larger year-on-year increase. In 2021, net financing through government bonds posted RMB7.02 trillion, RMB1.31 trillion less than that in 2020 when RMB1 trillion of special government bonds was issued for the COVID-19 response. Net debt financing by non-financial enterprises dropped by RMB1.09 trillion to RMB3.29 trillion, while their domestic equity financing registered RMB1.24 trillion, an increase of RMB343.4 billion over that in the previous year. Third, off-balance sheet financing recorded a notable year-on-year drop. Net financing through entrusted loans, trust loans, and undiscounted bankers鈥� acceptances exhibited a net decrease of RMB2.67 trillion, which was RMB1.35 trillion larger than the decrease in 2020. Box 3 China鈥檚 Macro Leverage Ratio Remains Generally Stable First, China has achieved notable results in stabilizing its leverage ratio. sectors to its GDP. Preliminary data show that China鈥檚 macro leverage ratio at end-2021 dropped by 7.7 percentage points from the year before to 272.5 percent, a decline for the fifth successive quarter, and China has made notable progress in stabilizing its leverage ratio. By sectors, at end-2021, the leverage ratio for the country鈥檚 non-financial companies, households, and government agencies registered 153.7 percent, 72.2 percent, and 46.6 percent, respectively, compared with the previous year, a decline of 8.0 percentage points and 0.4 percentage points for the first two sectors, and a rise of 0.7 percentage points for government agencies. Compared with the major economies, the increase in China鈥檚 macro leverage ratio is relatively manageable in the wake of COVID-19. The latest data from the BIS show that the leverage ratio in the U.S. (286.2 percent), Japan (416.5 percent), and the euro area (284.3 percent) at end-Q2 in 2021 added 31.3 percentage points, 37.1 percentage points, and 27.2 percentage points from end-2019, respectively. Over the corresponding period, China鈥檚 leverage ratio rose 19.9 percentage points from end-2019 to 275.9 percent, and its increase was 11.4 percentage points, 17.2 percentage points, and 7.3 percentage points lower than the U.S., Japan, and the euro area, respectively. Therefore, China has supported the rapid post-COVID economic recovery with relatively fewer new debts and, comparatively, its macro leverage ratio is not high. Second, the solid COVID-19 response, steady economic recovery, effective macro policies, and other factors all contribute to China鈥檚 generally stable macro leverage ratio. On the one hand, the key to stabilizing the macro leverage ratio lies in China鈥檚 notable progress in its COVID-19 response and its sustained economic recovery. Nominal GDP is the denominator in the calculation of the macro leverage ratio, and its growth rate significantly affects the movement of the leverage ratio. China鈥檚 GDP growth slowed markedly under the impact of COVID-19, and its macro leverage ratio rose during this period. The CPC Central Committee, with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core, oversaw the general situation and made the important decision to coordinate the COVID-19 response with economic and social development. These efforts made China the first country to bring COVID under control, to restart work and production, and to achieve positive economic growth. Economic growth became more resilient, which played a prominent role in stabilizing the leverage ratio. China鈥檚 nominal year-on-year GDP growth accelerated by 10.1 percentage points to 12.8 percent in 2021, markedly driving the macro leverage ratio lower. By quarters, starting from Q2 in 2020, the growth margin of macro leverage ratio moderated until it turned downward. The increase in the leverage ratio during the first three quarters of 2020 stood at 14.1 percentage points, 7.4 percentage points, and 4.1 percentage points, respectively, while the ratio declined by 1.4 percentage points, 2.1 percentage points, 2.2 percentage points, 0.7 percentage poinst, and 2.7 percentage points, respectively, from Q4 2020 to Q4 2021, falling for five consecutive quarters. On the other hand, macro policies with strength, appropriate intensity, and efficiency stabilized the fundamentals of the economy with manageable new debts. First, policies are strong. Prudent monetary policies have become more flexible, appropriate, and targeted with a prompt and strong response since the outbreak of COVID-19. Monetary support measures of over RMB9 trillion have been introduced, and financial institutions made RMB1.5 trillion in interest concessions to boost the real economy. All sectors have greater awareness of the financial support. Therefore, the sense of fulfillment of the sectors in the real economy has grown stronger. Meanwhile, fiscal policies have become more proactive to offset the impact of COVID-19, with the introduction of large-scale measures to help businesses get through the tough times. Net government bond financing in 2020 reached RMB8.32 trillion, an increase of RMB3.6 trillion from the previous year. On balance, macro policies were coordinated appropriately to foster strong synergies to ensure stability on six key fronts and to maintain security in six key areas, and the fundamentals of the economy were kept stable. Second, policies have been introduced with appropriate intensity. The PBC has maintained a prudent monetary policy by refraining from a deluge of strong stimulus policies and continuing with conventional monetary policies. Monetary policy has gradually shifted since May 2020 to its conventional stance, and since 2021 the PBC has maintained a forward-looking policy with continuity and consistency, stepped up intertemporal adjustments, and provided an enabling environment for a steady economic recovery. During 2020 and 2021, the growth rate of M2 and the AFRE averaged 9.5 percent and 11.8 percent, respectively, in line with and modestly higher than the average nominal GDP growth rate. Thanks to these developments, debt growth in China鈥檚 non-financial sectors was rather measured and manageable. Outstanding debt aggregates in 2021 increased 9.7 percent year on year, 2.7 percentage points lower than the growth at end-2020. This figure is at a historically low level, 7.3 percentage points lower than the average growth rate of debt aggregates from 2009 to 2019. Third, policies are effective. By focusing on serving the real economy and ensuring that stability is a top priority, monetary policy maintained steady growth of money and credit. By smoothing the transmission of monetary policy and continuously advancing the LPR reform, monetary policy guided the marked decline in corporate funding costs. By making policies more targeted and providing direct support to the real economy, financial support policies were phased in to leverage the dual functions of monetary policy instruments in the adjustment of aggregates and structure. Moreover, the difficult fight against financial risks curbed both funds from being diverted out of the real economy and from disorderly expansion, and financial reforms advanced steadily with enhanced quality and efficiency in financial services. All these measures enhanced the efficiency of financial services for the real economy and helped the relatively quick post-COVID economic recovery with fewer new debts. Third, the macro leverage ratio in 2022 is expected to remain generally stable. The Central Economic Work Conference noted that economic work next year should prioritize stability while pursuing progress, and macro policies should be prudent and effective to strengthen the driving force for self-generated development. The steady decline in China鈥檚 macro leverage ratio will provide room for the financial system to ramp up support for its real economy. Meanwhile, good COVID-19 prevention and control and growing economic resilience will also provide conditions for continued stability of its macro leverage ratio. In the next phase, the PBC will keep prudent monetary policy flexible and appropriate, step up intertemporal adjustments, enhance the stability in the growth of credit aggregates, and see that increases in money supply and aggregate financing are generally in step with economic growth in nominal terms. This 鈥渋n step with鈥� mechanism itself contains the notion of 鈥渒eeping the macro leverage rate generally stable.鈥� As the economic recovery continues and the driving force for self-generated development strengthens, the macro leverage ratio will remain generally stable in 2022.IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level In 2021, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and market expectations have been generally stable. The managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies worked well. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. Market factors and policy factors effectively corrected exchange rate deviations, and the RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. During 2021, the RMB appreciated modestly against a basket of currencies. At yearend, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange-rate index and the RMB exchange-rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 102.47 and 100.34, respectively, up 8.1 percent and 6.5 percent from end- 2020. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end-2020 to end-2021, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 8.0 percent and 4.5 percent, respectively, and from the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism that began in 2005 to end-2021, appreciation of the NEER and the REER of the RMB registered 48.7 percent and 58.2 percent, respectively. At end-2021, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.3757, appreciating 2.3 percent from end-2020 and 29.8 percent on a cumulative basis since the reform of the exchange-rate formation mechanism that began in 2005. In 2021, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 3.0 percent. In 2021, cross-border RMB settlements increased 29 percent year on year to RMB36.6 trillion, with RMB receipts and payments posting RMB18.5 trillion and RMB18.1 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 16 percent year on year to RMB7.9 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB5.8 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and other items registered RMB2.1 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB28.7 trillion, increasing 33 percent year on year. Specifically, RMB settlements of direct investments posted RMB5.8 trillion, while RMB settlements of securities investments recorded RMB21.2 trillion. Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q4 2021, the PBC resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, kept the sound monetary policy flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate, enhanced intertemporal adjustments, coordinated cross-year policies, and brought into play the dual functions of monetary policy tools in adjusting the credit aggregate and structure. By lowering the required reserve ratio (RRR), strengthening the use of structural monetary policy instruments, unleashing the benefits of the LPR reform and other approaches, the PBC put emphasis on strengthening the stability of aggregate credit growth, continuously scaled up support for weak links and key areas, further promoted the steady decline of overall financing costs for enterprises, and contributed to stabilizing the whole macro economy, thereby fostering a favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. In Q4 2021, the PBC strengthened market monitoring and cross-cyclical liquidity adjustments. Based on the adoption of monetary policy instruments such as RRR cuts and the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) to provide medium and long-term liquidity, the PBC conducted successive daily open market operations and managed the intensity of operations flexibly to timely offset the impacts of fiscal expenditures and revenue, issuance of government bonds, and temporary or seasonal factors such as the National Day holiday and the year end, thus maintaining liquidity in the banking system at a reasonable and adequate level. In late December, the PBC conducted 14-day reverse repos in a phased manner to release cross-year liquidity in advance, and it moderately intensified operations in an attempt to maintain a basic equilibrium between supply and demand of the cross-year funds. Meanwhile, by properly arranging the operation timing and maturities, the PBC ensured that the funds that had been supplied at year-end would be withdrawn timely upon their maturity after New Year鈥檚 Day so as to effectively ensure the stability of liquidity and money market operations across the year. Guiding market rates to move around central bank policy rates in a reasonable manner. In Q4 2021, the rates paid on open market operations (OMO) remained unchanged. Since the beginning of 2021, the institutional building of open market operations has achieved remarkable results. First, the PBC sent successive short-term policy rate signals through daily open market operations in a bid to stabilize market expectations. In addition, the PBC clarified that OMO rates were short-term policy rates and guided the weighted average rate on 7-day repos between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) to move around the policy rates within a range. Liquidity expectations of financial institutions became more stable at key junctures, such as quarter-end and year-end. Demand for precautionary liquidity dropped significantly, and money market rates remained stable. In 2021, the DR007 averaged 2.17 percent, approximating the 2.20 percent of the central bank鈥檚 7-day OMO rate. On January 17, 2022, the PBC conducted a total of RMB700 billion of MLF operations and RMB100 billion of 7-day reverse repos. The rates paid on the MLF and the openmarket operations both declined by 10 basis points to 2.85 percent and 2.10 percent, respectively. The operations increased liquidity supply and offset the impacts of the tax payment peak in January, the accelerated issuance of government bonds, cash provisions before the Spring Festival, and other short-term factors in advance, thus keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The declined rates paid on the MLF and the open-market operations showed that the proactive response and quick measures taken at an early stage regarding monetary policy were conducive to uplifting market confidence and to promoting a steady decline in the comprehensive financing costs for enterprises. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q4 2021, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. In 2021, the PBC conducted CBS operations regularly on a monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital as well as in enhancing the stability of aggregate credit growth by banks, especially by small and medium-sized banks. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis and introducing the market-maker mechanism for central bank bill repos. In Q4 2021, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. In 2021, the PBC issued twelve batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills totaling RMB120 billion. In January 2021, the Bank of China (Hong Kong) introduced the market-maker mechanism for RMB-denominated central bank bill repos in Hong Kong. A total of RMB309 billion of central bank bill repo transactions were completed in 2021, with the scope of institutional participants continuously expanding. The regular issuance of central bank bills and the introduction of the market-maker mechanism for central bank bill repos in Hong Kong enriched the scope of RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in Hong Kong, which played an active role in promoting the sound development of the offshore RMB money market and bond market and in propelling both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market. According to statistics, in 2021 offshore RMB bond issuances, excluding RMB-denominated central bank bills issued in Hong 21 Kong, registered over RMB180 billion, an increase of 38 percent year on year. The RMB offshore money market and bond market are becoming increasingly buoyant. II. Timely conducting Standing Lending Facility and Medium-term Lending Facility operations Conducting MLF operations in a timely manner. To ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions of the medium-term policy rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB4.55 trillion of MLF operations in 2021, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.95 percent. In particular, the amount of MLF operations posted RMB0.8 trillion, RMB0.45 trillion, RMB1.3 trillion, and RMB2.0 trillion in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, respectively. At end-2021, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.55 trillion, RMB0.6 trillion less than that at the beginning of 2021. On January 17, 2022, MLF operations were conducted with a rate paid at 2.85 percent, down 10 basis points. Advancing the reforms of electronic SLF operations. The entire process of conducting SLF operations became electronic in an orderly manner, which enhanced operational efficiency, stabilized market expectations, and strengthened the stability of liquidity in the banking system. In 2021, the PBC conducted a total of RMB76.03 billion SLF operations, of which RMB47.51 billion, RMB11.55 billion, RMB2.75 billion, and RMB14.22 billion of SLF operations were conducted in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, respectively. At end-2021, the balance of SLF operations registered RMB12.68 billion. The SLF rate played its role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, and it promoted the smooth operation of money market rates. At end-2021, the overnight, 7- day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 3.05 percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively, on par with the rates at end-Q3. On January 17, 2022, SLF rates of all maturities were lowered by 10 basis points each. After the rate cut, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.95 percent, 3.10 percent, and 3.45 percent, respectively.III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions In Q4, 2021, the required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered by 0.5 percentage points in an attempt to support the real economy and to promote the steady decline of overall financing costs. The PBC reduced the required reserve ratio by 0.5 percentage points, effective on December 15, 2021 (not applicable to financial institutions that had already implemented a required reserve ratio of 5 percent). Meanwhile, financial institutions that participated in the assessment of the targeted RRR cut for inclusive finance were all entitled to the most preferential required reserve ratio, releasing about RMB1.2 trillion of long-term funds. After this round of RRR cuts, the weighted average required reserve ratio for financial institutions stood at 8.4 percent. This RRR cut is a conventional operation, aimed at enhancing intertemporal adjustments, improving the funding structure of financial institutions, and strengthening the capacity of the financial sector to serve the real economy. First, the PBC kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, effectively expanded the sources of long-term stable funding for financial institutions, and enhanced their capability to allocate funds. Second, the PBC guided these institutions to actively use the funds released from the RRR cut to boost support for the real economy, especially micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Third, the RRR cut lowered the funding costs of financial institutions by approximately RMB15 billion per year, which further reduced the overall financing costs for enterprises through the transmission of financial institutions. The two across-the-board RRR cuts of 0.5 percentage points for each in 2021 released a total of about RMB2.2 trillion of long-term funds. The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was raised for financial institutions, and foreign exchange liquidity management of financial institutions was enhanced. The PBC raised the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by 2 percentage points, from 7 percent to 9 percent, effective on December 15, 2021, freezing around USD20 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. In 2021, the PBC raised the foreign exchange RRR twice, both by 2 percentage points, freezing a total of about USD 40 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. IV. Further improving the macro prudential management framework The role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In 2021, the PBC further improved the framework of the MPA and the assessment mechanism, and it attached importance to their guidance on both the aggregate and the structure of credit. By adjusting and optimizing relevant assessment indicators in a dynamic manner, the PBC guided financial institutions to enhance the stability of growth of credit aggregates and to continue to ramp up support for the real economy, especially by issuing loans to inclusive MSBs and medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector. Guidelines on Macro-Prudential Policies (Trial) were released. On December 31, 2021, the PBC released the Guidelines on Macro-Prudential Policies (Trial) (hereinafter referred to as the Guidelines). Based on the actual situation in China, the Guidelines specify elements for establishing a sound macro-prudential policy framework. First, they define concepts related to macro-prudential policies, such as the macro-prudential policy framework, systemic financial risks, and the workingmechanisms of the macro-prudential management. Second, they lay out the major content of the macro-prudential policy framework, including its policy objectives, assessment of systemic financial risks, policy tools, transmission mechanisms, and governance mechanisms. Third, they put forward the support and safeguards as well as the policy coordination requirements necessary for the effective implementation of macro-prudential policies. Promulgation of the Guidelines is a major measure for establishing a sound macro-prudential policy framework, which is conducive to building a smooth governance mechanism of macro-prudential policies, to developing a coordinated system of forestalling and defusing systemic financial risks, and to promoting sound development of the financial system. The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was improved. To improve the regulatory framework of Systemically Important Banks (SIBs), the PBC drafted the Additional Regulatory Rules on SIBs (Trial) jointly with the CBIRC, and solicited public opinions starting from April 2, 2021, which were officially released on October 15, entitled Order No.5 [2021] of the PBC and CBIRC. The Order specifies. requirements for additional regulation, recovery and resolution plans, and prudential regulation, providing guidance and standards for implementing regulation of the SIBs. On October 15, the PBC and CBIRC also published a list of domestic SIBs. A total of nineteen banks were identified as domestic SIBs on the basis of the data assessment in 2020, including six state-owned commercial banks, nine jointstock commercial banks, and four city commercial banks. The regulatory system for financial holding companies (FHCs) was further improved. Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC has made proactive efforts to carry out administrative approvals of FHCs. On March 31, it released the Interim Regulations on Filing-based Management of Directors, Supervisors, and Senior Executives of Financial Holding Companies (Order No.2 [2021] of the PBC) (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations). The Regulations clarify that the PBC should perform the duties of filing and supervising directors, supervisors, and senior executives of FHCs, and they specify the eligible conditions for personnel and the relevant filing procedures. In addition, the PBC reinforced appointment management so as to regulate the operation of FHCs and to guard against relevant risks. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending to support rural development, central bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, and other instruments to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and weak links in the national economy and for coordinated regional development. The PBC gave full play to the role of central bank lending to support rural development and central banklending for MSBs in providing targeted liquidity and serving as positive incentives, and it guided locally incorporated financial institutions to expand credit supply for MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural people. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to the current regulations so as to support and consolidate the effective connections between achievements in poverty eradication and rural revitalization. In ten provinces with slow credit growth, locally incorporated financial institutions were guided further to make good use of the quota of RMB200 billion of central bank lending and to step up support for the economic weak links, such as local agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private firms, so as to promote coordinated regional development. More relief and assistance was provided for market entities, especially MSMEs. The new quota of RMB300 billion central bank lending for micro and small businesses (MSBs) was fully utilized, effectively satisfying the financing demand of MSBs and self-employed businesses hard hit by mounting commodity prices and COVID-19, and substantially reducing the financing costs. As of end-2021, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development stood at RMB496.7 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.2351 trillion and RMB175.0 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB590.3 billion. In 2021, the PBC made net withdrawals of PSLs in the amount of RMB433.4 billion from development and policy banks, with net withdrawals in Q4 totaling RMB82.7 billion and the outstanding PSLs registering RMB2.8017 trillion at end-2021. Steadily advancing the two monetary policy instruments that directly support the real economy to bolster the development of MSBs. At end-2021, the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans provided a total of RMB21.7 billion in incentive funds. This has directly motivated locally incorporated banks to defer repayments on RMB2.17 trillion inclusive MSB loans and for nationwide financial institutions in the banking sector to defer payments on RMB16 trillion loans, easing the phased pressures on MSBs to repay the principal and interest. The support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans provided a total of RMB374.0 billion in preferential funding. This has directly motivated locally incorporated banks to issue RMB1.05 trillion in unsecured MSB loans and for financial institutions in the banking sector nationwide to issue RMB10.3 trillion in inclusive unsecured MSB loans, thereby effectively alleviating the financing difficulties of MSBs. According to the arrangements of the executive meetings of the State Council, the PBC converted the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans into the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans in a market-based way so as to provide financial support for stabilizing enterprises and securing employment in a more sustainable manner.Box 4 Two Instruments Directly Supporting the Real Economy Continue with Modified Arrangements MSBs play a major role in the national economy as these numerous and wide-ranging market entities are the major representatives of market dynamism and job creators. To ease the shocks of COVID-19 on MSBs, the PBC, following the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, implemented two monetary policy instruments directly supporting the real economy from June 2020 to end-2021, namely, the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans and the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans. The two instruments supported locally incorporated banks to defer the repayments on the principal and interest of loans for MSBs in temporary difficulty and encouraged these banks to increase unsecured loans to MSBs. They have reduced the phased pressures on MSBs to repay the principal and interest, eased the shortage of collateral and financing difficulties facing MSBs, and have played a positive role in securing market entities and employment. As MSBs are struggling amid downward economic pressures in China, further enhancing financial support for them is favorable for stabilizing enterprises, securing employment, and ensuring the overall stability of the macro economy. Following the decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council on further enhancing financial support for MSMEs in a market-based way, the PBC issued a timely notice announcing that from January 1, 2022, the two monetary policy instruments directly supporting the real economy will continue with modified arrangements. First, the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans will be converted into the instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans. From the beginning of 2022, financial institutions and businesses may independently negotiate their terms on principal and interest repayments in line with market-based principles. From the beginning of 2022 to end-June 2023, for inclusive MSB loans issued by locally incorporated banks, the PBC will provide funding in the amount of 1 percent of their incremental balance of these loans, thus encouraging the expansion of inclusive MSB loans. The instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans has an incentive mechanism to motivate locally incorporated banks to serve MSBs and to increase the volume, lower the price, and expand the coverage of MSB financing. First, the instrument targets six types of eligible locally incorporated banks, including urban commercial banks, rural commercial banks, rural cooperative banks, rural credit cooperatives, village banks, and private banks (including Internet banks). Second, the instrument provides funding for locally incorporated banks based on the increment of MSB loan balance. Through monetary policy operations, the PBC provides 1 percent of the quarter-on-quarterincrement (the increase at the end of a quarter compared with the previous quarter) of the inclusive MSB loan balance for these banks. The funding is examined and issued on a quarterly basis. If the quarter-on-quarter increment is negative, it will not be calculated until it is adequate in future quarters so as to promote the continuous growth of the inclusive MSB loan balance. Providing incentives on the basis of the loan increment will not only guide locally incorporated banks to continuously support the borrowing demand of old customers, but also motivate them to tap into new customers. Third, the sound principle should be upheld. To prevent moral hazards, the credit risks of relevant loans will still be shouldered by locally incorporated banks so as to encourage sound banks with potential to enhance support for MSBs on the premise of risk prevention and control. Second, from 2022 the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans will be incorporated into the management of central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs. The quota of RMB400 billion central bank lending originally arranged to support inclusive unsecured MSB loans may be rolled over, and if necessary, may be further increased. Eligible locally incorporated banks that issue inclusive unsecured MSB loans may apply to the PBC for preferential funding of central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs. It aims to make this type of central bank lending more targeted, direct, and effective, guiding locally incorporated banks to continuously expand credit supply to agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private firms. Going forward, the PBC will, in line with market-based and law-based principles, give full play to the guiding role of market-based policy instruments after the conversion of the two monetary policy instruments directly supporting the real economy. It will further motivate locally incorporated banks to enhance support for MSBs, MSB owners, and self-employed businesses, tap into proper financing demands, increase the proportion of inclusive unsecured MSB loans, and increase the volume, lower the price, and expand the coverage of inclusive MSB loans so as to ease the financing difficulties and reduce the financing costs for MSBs. The carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and special central bank lending targeted for the clean and efficient coal use were launched, contributing to achievement of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality in a scientific and orderly manner. According to the decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council, the PBC launched the CERF to support three major areas of carbon reduction, namely, clean energy, energy conservation and environmental protection, and carbon reduction technology. It also launched special central bank lending targeted for the clean and efficient coal use to support seven relevant areas, including mass clean coal production and the application of clean combustion technology. In November 2021, the PBC released the Notice on Launching the CERF (Yinfa No.278 [2021]) and the Notice on Launching Special Central Bank Lending Targeted for the Clean and Efficient Coal Use (Yinfa No.289 [2021]), stipulating that the two instruments adopt a direct mechanism whereby 鈥渃entral bank lending follows corporate loans.鈥� Under this facility, financial institutions can apply to the PBC for funding support after issuing loans to enterprises in relevant areas at preferential rates on the premise of making independent decisions and bearing the risks on their own. For financial institutions issuing qualified loans, the PBC provides low-cost funds in the amount of a specified proportion of the principal. To be specific, the CERF and special central bank lending targeted for the clean and efficient coal use provide 60 percent and 100 percent of the loan principal, respectively, both at a rate of 1.75 percent. In Q4, the PBC granted the first batch of funds to relevant financial institutions through the aforementioned two instruments, totaling RMB88.2 billion. In particular, the CERF and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coal posted RMB85.5 billion and RMB2.7 billion, respectively. Going forward, the PBC will ensure effective implementation of these two instruments, promote financial institutions to provide credit support for carbon emissions reductions and the clean and efficient use of coal, and facilitate the transition to a green and low-carbon economy while ensuring security of the energy supply so as to contribute to the achievement of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality in a scientific and orderly way. Box 5 Exploring the Conducting of Stress Tests on Climate Risk From August to November 2021, the PBC organized some banking institutions to perform the climate risk stress test based on sensitivity analysis and to assess the potential impact of China鈥檚 transition toward the goals of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality in the banking sector so as to strengthen the capacity of banking institutions to manage climate鈥搑elated risks. The participating banks consisted of two development and policy banks, six large commercial banks, twelve joint-stock commercial banks, and three city commercial banks. Mainly focusing on enterprises with annual CO2 emissions above 26,000 tonnes of thermal power, and the steel and cement industries (based on definition of the standards of the major greenhouse emission entities set by the Ministry of Ecology and Environment), the testing examined the effects of the rising cost of carbon emissions on the enterprises鈥� capacity to service debts and also on the quality of related credit assets held by the participating banks as well as their capital adequacy level. The test adopted the following methodology and assumptions: on stress scenarios, three types of carbon prices were specified based on mildly adverse, adverse and severely adverse scenarios, with the main reference to the price changes in the domesticcarbon emissions market and to the carbon price scenarios from the Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). On the key assumptions, first, enterprises were assumed to pay for their carbon emissions based on a certain ratio, which rose every year; second, it was assumed that there is no technological progress and a single enterprise has no bargaining power upstream or downstream; third, insolvent enterprises were assumed to default on their loans. On risk transmission channels, target enterprises were assumed to face growing production costs and declining profitability due to expenditures on carbon emissions, leading to a rise in the probability of loan defaults and expected bank losses as well as an adverse impact on the capital adequacy level of banks (as the figure below shows). The test set end-2020 as the baseline with a ten-year horizon. If a participating bank meets all the regulatory requirements on its post-stress CET1 ratio, Tier 1 ratio and capital adequacy ratio (CAR) (including additional capital requirements for systemically important banks) in 2030, it will be regarded as passing the stress test.According to the test results, without a low-carbon transition, the enterprises of thermal power, steel, and cement industries would face a weakened capacity to service debts under the stress scenarios. However, as the proportions of loans to such industries were not high for the participating banks, the aggregate CAR met the regulatory requirements under all three stress scenarios. At end-2020, the provision coverage ratio of the participating banks reported 222.56 percent, with the loan provision ratio at 3.22 percent and the CAR at 14.89 percent. Under the mildly adverse, adverse and severely adverse scenarios, the aggregate CAR of the participating banks will decline to 14.57 percent, 14.42 percent, and 14.27 percent at the end of 2030, respectively, above the regulatory requirements. As a preliminary exploration of the PBC for assessing the impacts of climate risk on the financial system, the test鈥檚 stress scenarios and key assumptions do not represent the existing policies or future policy orientations. Based on the test, the utmost challenge lies in insufficient disclosures of carbon emissions information and the big data gap in China, and the testing methodology also needs improvements. The results will not be used as a basis for policy decisions. Looking forward, the PBC will continue to improve the methodology for climate risk stress test based on sensitivity analysis, expand its industrial coverage, and further explore the climate risk stress test based on macroeconomic scenarios.. VI. Leveraging the structural guidance role of credit policies Financial support to stabilize businesses and secure employment was stepped up. The Project of Enhancing the Capacity to Provide Financial Services for MSMEs was further advanced in a bid to promote MSB financing featuring 鈥渋ncreased volume, expanded coverage, and lowered prices.鈥� As of end-2021, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 27.3 percent year on year to RMB19.2 trillion. These loans supported 44.56 million MSBs, an increase of 38 percent year on year. The weighted average interest rate on new inclusive loans to MSBs posted 4.93 percent in 2021, dropping by 0.22 percentage points from 2020, a decline outstripping the overall drop of corporate loan interest rates. By focusing on key support groups and key businesses, the PBC made innovations in a variety of activities bridging government agencies, banks, and businesses to promote more effective and better-targeted financing connections. The campaign to 鈥渆xtend loans to small businesses to enhance people鈥檚 well-being鈥� was carried out to provide financial support for the development of self-employed individuals, and problems of pressing concern for these individuals were addressed through strengthening connections of financing information and moving ahead the financing service window, i.e., providing financial services in a proactive and welltargeted manner. Financial support to culture and tourism, accommodations and catering, retail, foreign trade, and other sectors has been stepped up. As of end-2021, a list of key enterprises was developed, comprising 515,000 firms in industries hit by COVID-19 and core businesses in the supply chain, and financial institutions extended cumulative loans of RMB8.3 trillion, boosting and stabilizing jobs for 35 million people. Financial support to consolidate and expand the achievements of poverty eradication was put in place, and rural revitalization was promoted on all fronts. Continued efforts have been made to put in place the Opinions on Financial Support for Consolidating and Expanding Achievements in the Critical Battle against Poverty and Promoting Rural Revitalization on all Fronts, which encourage and guide financial institutions to strictly follow the requirements of the 鈥淔our Withouts,鈥� i.e., lifting areas out of poverty without loading off responsibilities, without abolishing policies, without ceasing support, and without removing supervision, so as to provide continuous support for the development of regions and population that had been lifted out of poverty. Meanwhile, the PBC ensured financial services to key areas that safeguard an efficient supply of grain and vital agricultural products as well as to key entities such as new types of agribusinesses, encouraged innovation in tailored financial products and services, and made consolidated efforts to provide better financial services. As of end- 2021, outstanding agro-related loans increased 10.9 percent year on year to RMB43.21 trillion. VII. Deepening the market-based interest rate reform Since 2021, the PBC has adopted reform measures to smooth the transmission of monetary policy. The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform were continuously unleashed, and a steady decline in overall corporate financing costs was promoted. First, the PBC encouraged financial institutions to fully tap into the LPR in pricing so as to enhance competition in the MSB loan market. The central bank lending rate in support of agriculture and MSBs was cut by 0.25 percentage points in December 2021, and the one-year LPR was lowered by 5 basis points in the same month, so the actual lending rates moved further downward on the basis of the significant decline in 2020. In December, the weighted average lending rate dropped by 0.27 percentage points year on year to 4.76 percent and the weighted average interest rate on corporate loans fell by 0.04 percentage points to 4.57 percent. Second, the PBC implemented measures to improve regulation over deposit rates and maintained fair competition in the deposit market. It modified the mechanism for a self-regulatory ceiling of deposit rates by adding basis points to the benchmark interest rates so as to guide the medium and longterm deposit rates to move down, to improve the term structure of deposits, to reduce banks鈥� liability costs, and to promote the steady decline of overall corporate financing costs. Third, the PBC advanced the market-based interest rate reform of credit card overdrafts. It has removed the upper and lower limits on credit card overdraft interest rates from January 1, 2021, and the issuers and users can negotiate their own interest rates for credit card overdrafts. Fourth, the PBC continued to promote lenders of all sorts to explicitly post the annualized interest rates of their loan products so as to protect the lawful rights and interests of financial consumers. Fifth, the PBC continued to advance the onshore transition of international benchmark interest rates. It organized the release of recommended loan agreements based on onshore USD floating interest rates and the standard document for the backup mechanism of the Interbank Offered Rate (IBOR) in the NAFMII master agreement. It guided and urged major banks to be well prepared for the benchmark transition in areas of signing the agreement, communicating with customers, internal training, system upgrading, etc., thus responding appropriately to the LIBOR reform.VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In 2021, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the USD were 6.3498 and 6.5731, respectively. During the 243 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 128 days and depreciated on 115 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 1.0 percent (648 bps) and 0.8 percent (543 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate appreciated against other major international currencies. At end-2021, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen appreciated 2.3 percent, 11.2 percent, 3.3 percent, and 14.1 percent, respectively, from end-2020. Since the reform of the RMB exchange-rate formation mechanism that commenced in 2005 to end-2021, the RMB appreciated by a cumulative total of 29.8 percent, 38.7 percent, and 31.8 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and investment. As of end-2021, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and foreign monetary authorities, foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB61.532 billion and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD342 million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions New achievements were made to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC adhered to the disposal of risks in a market-oriented and law-based manner, with total financial risks decreasing. The disposal of risks of key conglomerates and large enterprises was steadily advanced. The risk disposal of existing high-risk institutions was continuously promoted, with the number of high-risk institutions decreasing notably. The China Financial Stability Report (2021) was issued, continuously improving risk monitoring of the banking, securities, and insurance sectors and the financial market. The Administrative Measures on the Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity of Global Systemically Important Banks were issued and implemented, ensuring that the global systemically important banks in China are fully capable of absorbing losses and recapitalization. The central bank rating of financial institutions in Q3 was completed, with over 4,000 banking financial institutions being rated throughout the nation. As a result, actual risk exposure was ascertained, and high-risk institutions were identified precisely. The PBC conducted annual stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions, and risk monitoring of large enterprises was conducted on a quarterly basis. Box 6 Key Achievements in Forestalling and Defusing Major Financial Risks After the 19th National Congress of the CPC made the important arrangement of 鈥渞esolutely fighting the critical battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks,鈥� under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the Financial Stability and Development Committee under the State Council (hereinafter referred to as the FSDC) has taken a lead. The PBC has earnestly fulfilled its role as the General Office of the FSDC, cooperated with relevant departments and local governments in steadily promoting the relevant tasks, made major periodic achievements in fighting the critical battle, and firmly defended the bottom line so that no systemic risks should occur. Thus, favorable economic and financial environments have been created for building a moderately prosperous society in all respects. First, macro risks are under effective control. The PBC has maintained a sound monetary policy, has ensured an appropriate aggregate supply of money, and has kept the macro leverage ratio stable. From 2017 to 2019, the macro leverage ratio was kept stable at about 250 percent, with annual growth of about 2 percentage points, creating policy space for the subsequent fight against COVID-19 and strengthening intertemporal policy adjustments. Under the impact of COVID-19 in 2020, China鈥檚 economic growth witnessed a certain period of an obvious slowdown. With Xi Jinping at its core , the CPC Central Committee made important decisions and arrangements regarding coordination between pandemic prevention and control and social and economic development. The macro polices are powerful, well-calibrated, and effective, stabilizing the economic fundamentals with debt growth under control. At end-2020, the macro leverage ratio rose temporarily to 280.2 percent, which witnessed a subsequent steady decrease and fell to 272.5 percent by end-2021. Second, resolution of key high-risk institutions has been conducted in a steady manner. Ten financial institutions controlled by 鈥淢ingtian Group鈥�, such as Baoshang Bank (BSB), Huaxia Life Insurance, and New Times Securities, have been taken over in a decisive and orderly manner, with bankruptcy and liquidation of BSB steadily completed. Resolution of the Huaxin Group is generally completed and that of the Anbang Insurance Group is reaching a conclusion. The restructuring plan of the HNA Group has been approved by the court. Together with the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission, the PBC has guided the relevant local governments to steadily resolve the risks of large enterprises, such as the Founder Group, and those of small and medium-sized financial institutions, such as Hengfeng Bank. In addition, while focusing on major risks, the authorities also took the whole picture under surveillance, and enhanced early warning and timely resolution of risks. The PBC has continuously promoted risk disposal of high-risk rural small and medium-sized banking institutions and has promptly contained the sporadic bank runs at the branch levels. Third, efforts have been made to rectify financial disorder and to crack down on illegal financial activities in a forceful manner. Unauthorized Internet-based asset management institutions, unauthorized payment institutions, equity crowd-funding platforms, and illegal Internet 鈥渕utual-insurance鈥� platforms have all been cleaned up. All operating peer-to-peer lending institutions have exited from the market. On-shore cryptocurrency trading and financing platforms of initial coin offerings have been closed. Unauthorized on-shore and off-shore online foreign exchange trading platforms have been shut down. A special rectification has been conducted to crack down on illegal fund-raising, and a serious crackdown has been conducted on illegal fund-raising and similar illegal financial activities. Fourth, there has been a sharp decline in shadow banking risks. According to the requirement of 鈥減reventing risks, rectifying disorder, and shoring up weaknesses,鈥� the Guidelines on Regulating the Asset Management Business of Financial Institutions (hereinafter referred to as the Guidelines) and their complementary rules were issued in a timely manner. With the transition period of the Guidelines coming to an end at end-2021 as expected, the scale of asset management products has grown amidst stability, the structure has continuously been optimized, the share of net value-based products has increased by a large margin, and risks have obviously moderated. Joint efforts have been made to rectify financial disorder such as violations of inter-bank business regulations, leverage financing, off-balance-sheet businesses, and arbitrage, as well as diversions from the real economy into the virtual economy. High-risk shadow banking businesses have been continuously dismantled, leading to an obvious decline of risks and hazards resulting from shadow banking. Fifth, risks from external shocks have been dealt with effectively. The capital market has withstood shocks, such as the turbulence of the international financial market and the escalating external pressures on China. At the same time, the reform of fundamental arrangements has continuously been deepened. The coordinated management framework of 鈥渕acro prudential management plus micro regulation鈥� has been continuously improved, and the policy toolkit has been diversified and perfected. Therefore, in the midst of complicated and rapidly changing situations, the stability of the foreign exchange market and the security of the national economy and finance have been effectively safeguarded. Sixth, anti-corruption and rectifying disorder have been closely integrated with risk resolution. The PBC has effectively promoted the establishment of a risk prevention and control mechanism, earnestly held those responsible to account, improved law-based finance, shored up regulatory weaknesses, filled in regulatory gaps, and resolutely investigated and dealt with a number of major cases with adverse influence on the market. As a result, supervisory negligence and criminal behavior hidden behind the financial risks have been seriously punished. As concentrated efforts have been made to fight the tough battle, the prominent risks accumulated in China鈥檚 financial system have been disposed of in an effective manner, and institutional weaknesses have been gradually shored up. The endogenous risks, which are caused by illegal and illegitimate operations of some financial institutions and by the financial sector being distracted from its intended purpose of serving the real economy, have been basically eliminated. Currently, China鈥檚 financial system is healthy and stable overall, with the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy further improved. According to the central bank rating of financial institutions in Q3, of over 4,400 banking institutions rated throughout the nation, 4,002 institutions are rated within the safe boundary, with assets accounting for 98.65 percent of the total in the banking industry. In particular, 24 large banks operate in a sound manner, and the quality of their assets is fine. Their assets account for 70 percent of the industry, constituting the steady mainstay of China鈥檚 financial system. It should also be noted that under the impact of COVID-19, as centennial changes are accelerating, the external environment tends to be more complicated and serious, and it faces more uncertainties. China鈥檚 economic development is faced with the triple pressures of shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakened expectations, and the risk prevention situation is still complicated and serious. Going forward, the PBC must always follow the central and unified leadership of the CPC Central Committee on finance, hold steadfast to the fundamental position of people-centered development, understand the new development stage, act on the new development philosophy, and establish a new development paradigm to drive highquality development. It will place emphasis on stabilizing growth and preventing risks, give priority to stability, and pursue progress while ensuring stability. In line with the principles of 鈥渕aintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,鈥� it will adhere to marketoriented and law-based principles, continue to promote recovery amidst operations and to defuse risks through reform, and it will ensure that all concerned parties truly perform their respective duties. It will make the policy adjustments more forward-looking, preemptive, and systematic, actively respond to new situations and challenges, firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur, and resolutely maintain the stability of overall economic and social development. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC worked to comprehensively implement the reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scope, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main businesses, and give full play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control. X. Deepening reform of foreign exchange arrangements Pilot programs for a higher-level opening-up of cross-border trade and investment were conducted in some districts. Currently, based on the approval of the State Council, the SAFE has conducted pilot programs for the higher-level opening-up of cross-border trade and investment in districts such as Lin-gang Special Area of China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone, Nansha New Zone Area of China (Guangdong) Pilot Free Trade Zone, Yangpu Economic Development Zone of China (Hainan) Pilot Free Trade Zone, and Beilun District of Ningbo Municipality in Zhejiang Province. The pilot policies include nine capital account reform measures, four current account facilitation measures, and two requirements for strengthening risk prevention and control and supervision capacity-building . The regular issuance of the qualified domestic institutional investors (QDII) quota was continuously promoted, with macro prudential management on quota and risk prevention optimized. Sticking to regular and standardized issuances of the QDII quota, the SAFE conducted seven rounds of issuing QDII quotas in 2021, totaling USD40.8 billion to 57 institutions, better satisfying the demand of domestic market entities for cross-border investment. Facilitation of cross-border investment and financing was further promoted, supporting development of the real economy. In October 2021, the Official Reply of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on Supporting the Pilot Program of External Debt Facilitation in Chengdu and Chongqing was issued, approving four pilot programs in Chengdu and Chongqing on external debt registration without regional limitations and one-off registration of external debt for non-financial enterprises. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In 2021, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates remained stable with active market transactions. The bond market featured increased bond issuances and generally declining coupon rates. In general, the stock market index went up, with both turnover and the amount of funds raised witnessing year-on-year increases. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates remained stable with active market transactions. The money market was generally stable. In December 2021, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 2.02 percent, and the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.09 percent, 14 basis points and 10 basis points lower than that in September, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.94 percent, 12 basis points lower than that in September and 15 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos in the interbank market. At end-2021 the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.13 percent and 2.27 percent, respectively. Market transactions were active. In 2021, the volume of bond repos trading on the interbank market reached RMB1045.2 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB4.2 trillion, up 8.5 percent year on year. The volume of cumulative trading in interbank lending registered RMB118.8 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB475.3 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 19.6 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 84.4 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, decreasing 0.3 percentage points year on year, and overnight lending constituted 89.2 percent of the interbank lending, down 1.0 percentage point year on year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 21.9 percent year on year to RMB350 trillion. Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses operated steadily. In 2021, about 30,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB21.8 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB154.5 trillion. At end-2021, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.0 trillion. About 54,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions in 2021, raising RMB11.3 trillion, an increase of RMB1.6 trillion year on year. In 2021, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.62 percent, 10 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. Interest rate swap transactions witnessed steady growth. In 2021, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 252,000 transactions, decreasing 7.9 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB21.1 trillion, an increase of 8.0 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB15.3 trillion, accounting for 72.6 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7- day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 86.7 percent and 12.4 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In 2021, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 919 transactions, with RMB109.83 billion of the notional principal. The LPR interest rate option business developed steadily. Fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29, 2021. In 2021, a total of 390 interest rate option transactions were concluded, totaling RMB75.621 billion. Specifically, 32 were interest rate swap transactions, amounting to RMB1.560 billion of the notional principal, and 358 were interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB74.061 billion of the notional principal. 2. Coupon rates of bonds generally declined, while bond issuances expanded On the whole, coupon rates of bonds declined. In December 2021, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.82 percent, 3 basis points lower than that in September. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 3.02 percent, 10 basis points lower than the rate in September. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.07 percent, 79 basis points lower than the rate in September. Government securities yields went down. At end-December 2021, yields on 1-year, 3- year, 7-year, and 10-year government securities decreased by 9 basis points, 5 basis points, 7 basis points, and 7 basis points to 2.24 percent, 2.46 percent, 2.78 percent, and 2.78 percent from end-September, respectively. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 53 basis points, narrowing 1 basis point from endSeptember. Credit spreads narrowed, with yield spreads on 3-year AAA and AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills and CDB bonds narrowing by 8 basis points and 4 basis points to 34 basis points and 109 basis points from end-June, respectively. Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In 2021, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 7.8 percent, or RMB4.4 trillion, year on year to RMB61.4 trillion. Specifically, the issuance of local government bonds posted 7.48 trillion, up by 16.1 percent year on year, recording net financing of RMB4.82 trillion, up by 10.4 percent year on year. At end-2021, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB133.5 trillion, representing an increase of 14.1 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions on the interbank market decreased, while that on the stock exchange grew. In 2021, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB243.1 trillion, registering a decrease of 3.8 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank market was RMB214.4 trillion, representing a decrease of 7.9 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB28.7 trillion, an increase of 43.9 percent year on year. 3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market were basically stable The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In 2021, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB24.2 trillion, rising 9.3 percent year on year. At end-2021, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB15.0 trillion, increasing by 6.3 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances increased by RMB885.3 billion in 2021. Of the outstanding bankers鈥� acceptances, 67.8 percent was issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In 2021, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB45.9 trillion, growing 13.7percent year on year. At end-2021, the balance of bill financing was RMB9.9 trillion, up 17.9 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.1 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 0.3 percentage points year on year. In 2021, the interest rates for bill financing first increased and then decreased, but they remained generally stable. 4. Stock indices went up, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year on year The stock indices went up. At end-2021, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,640 points, increasing by 4.8 percent from end-2020; The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 14,857 points, increasing by 2.7 percent from end-2020. Turnover on the stock markets expanded. In 2021, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB258 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB1.1 trillion, representing an increase of 24.7 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets increased year on year. In 2021, a cumulative fund of RMB1.5 trillion was raised, increasing by 27.5 percent year on year. 5. Premium income decreased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down In 2021, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB4.5 trillion, down 0.8 percent year on year, a deceleration of 6.9 percentage points from the previous year. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB1.6 trillion, representing a year-on-year increase of 12.2 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 10.5 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went up by 13.9 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-2021, total assets in the insurance sector increased 6.8 percent year on year to RMB24.9 trillion, a deceleration of 6.5 percentage points from end-2020. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 0.8 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 8 percent year on year. 6. Turnover of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions witnessed rapid growth In 2021, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD10 trillion, an increase of 19.4 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD20.3 trillion, an increase of 24.4 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD13.6 trillion, accounting for 66.8 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD108.9 billion, rising 4.3 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD1.6 trillion, increasing by 93.1 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 55.6 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading declined, and prices went down At end-2021, international gold prices closed at USD1,794 per ounce, representing a loss of 4.3 percent from end-2020. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB373.85 per gram, decreasing by 4.1 percent from end-2020. In 2021, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 34,800 tons, representing a decrease of 40.6 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB13.08 trillion, a decrease of 42.0 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market Institutional arrangements in the bond market were further improved. In April 2021, the PBC released the Announcement No. 4 [2021] of the People鈥檚 Bank of China (Revision of the Announcement on Bond Trading and Circulation on the Interbank Bond Market). The Announcement further improves institutional arrangements and efficiency for bond trading and circulation, thus enhancing the capability of the bond market to serve the real economy. In August, the PBC, NDRC, MOF, CBIRC, and CSRC jointly released the Notice on Promoting the Sound Development of the Credit Rating Business on the Bond Market (Yinfa No.206 [2021]). The Notice improves rating quality and rating differentiation, allowing the credit rating business to better support the sound development of the bond market. In August, the PBC, NDRC, MOF, CBIRC, CSRC, and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) jointly released the Guiding Opinions on Advancing the Reform, Opening-Up, and HighQuality Development of the Corporate Credit Bond Market (Yinfa No.217 [2021]). The Guiding Opinions aim to improve the legal system for the bond market and to build a multi-tiered bond market system featuring robust regulation, orderly competition, transparency, and openness. The high-level two-way opening-up of China鈥檚 bond market pressed ahead in a steady manner. In September 2021, the PBC and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) jointly announced the launch of Southbound Trading under the mutual bond market access and connection scheme between the Mainland and Hong Kong (hereinafter referred to as the 鈥淪outhbound Bond Connect鈥�). In the same month, the PBC released the Notice of the PBC on Launching Southbound Trading under the Mutual Bond Market Access between the Mainland and Hong Kong. In October, FTSE Russell added Chinese government bonds to its World Government Bond Index (WGBI). So far, all three major global bond index providers have included Chinese bonds in their major indexes, which fully reflects the confidence that international investors have in the longterm sound development of China鈥檚 economy and in China鈥檚 commitment to a further opening-up of its financial markets. The opening-up of the financial markets helps China achieve high-quality economic growth and enables global investors to share China鈥檚 economic achievements. In December, to deepen the reform of 鈥渟treamlining administration, delegating powers, improving regulation and services,鈥� further unify and regulate the management framework for bond issuances in overseas jurisdictions by domestic financial institutions, and enhance the convenience and flexibility of issuing bonds overseas, the PBC and the NDRC jointly repealed the Interim Measures for the Administration of the Issuance of RMB Bonds in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region by Domestic Financial Institutions (Announcement No. 12 [2007] of the PBC and NDRC). The repeal of the Interim Measures will not affect the issuance of RMB and foreign currency-denominated bonds in Hong Kong and other countries (regions) by domestic financial institutions. In fact, the issuance procedures were improved and became more convenient, allowing issuers to choose the issuing regions and time windows within approved quotas at their discretion. 2. Reform and institutional arrangements in the securities market The capital market reform was deepened comprehensively. The Guangzhou Futures Exchange was launched in January 2021, aiming to serve the real economy and green development as well as the building of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area and the Belt and Road. On April 6, the Shenzhen Stock Exchange officially merged its main and SME boards, creating a new development paradigm featuring diversified yet complementary boards. In April, China鈥檚 first special representative litigation case of a securities dispute made its debut, which was significant for protecting the legitimate rights and interests of investors and boosting the sound development of the capital market. On November 15, the Beijing Stock Exchange started trading. Focusing on serving innovative SMEs, it further improved the multilayered capital market system.Institutional arrangements for capital market regulation were improved. In January 2021, the CSRC released the Provisions on Strengthening Regulation of Private Equity Investment Funds, which reiterated and detailed the regulations over the bottom lines in the operation of private equity funds to regulate development of the industry. In February, the CSRC released the Guidelines for the Application of Regulatory Rules -- Concerning Disclosure of Information by Shareholders of Companies Applying for IPO. The Guidelines tighten regulation over behavior such as sudden buying before the listing, abnormal buying prices, tunneling, and 鈥渟hadow shareholders,鈥� and targeting illegal 鈥渞ags to riches.鈥� In July, the General Offices of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council released the Opinions on Strictly Cracking Down on Illegal Securities Activities in Accordance with the Law. The Opinions consolidate a law-based and integrity-based capital market and help to create a favorable market ecology that upholds laws and honors commitments. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The insurance industry was opened up further. In March 2021, the CBIRC revised and released the Implementation Rules of the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on Foreign-funded Insurance Companies and removed the clauses concerning foreign ownership limits on joint-venture life insurance companies to maintain consistency among the relevant institutional systems. Meanwhile, it further elaborated on the entry criteria for foreign insurance group companies and for foreign financial institutions to invest in foreign-funded insurance companies. Supplementary improvements were made to clarify the requirements for market access and for changes of shareholders in foreign-funded insurance companies, relevant management systems for domestic insurance group companies, security reviews of foreign investment, etc. An exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot was launched. In May 2021, the CBIRC released the Notice on Exclusive Commercial Pension Insurance Pilots and it decided to launch an exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot in Zhejiang Province (including Ningbo City) and Chongqing Municipality for one year starting on June 1, 2021. PICC Life Insurance Company Limited and five other life insurance companies were to carry out the pilot work. The Notice specifies the methods of payment, design of the accumulation period and claiming period, the insurance liabilities, rules for insurance cancellation, information disclosures, and product management. It also clarifies the regulatory support policies with respect to equity asset allocations and the minimum capital requirement. Regulation of the solvency of insurance companies was strengthened. In January 2021, the CBIRC revised and released the Regulations on Solvency Management of Insurance Companies. The Regulations, with a risk-oriented approach, specify regulatory rules of solvency that integrate quantitative capital requirements, qualitative regulatory requirements, and market discipline mechanisms, thus making clear the three-pillar framework of solvency regulation. In December, the CBIRC released the Solvency Regulatory Rules II for Insurance Companies, which guide the insurance industry to return to its safeguarding role and to focus on its main businesses, enhance its capability to serve the real economy, and effectively prevent risks in the insurance sector. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments Disrupted by the resurgence of COVID-19, the global economic recovery has slowed down since the second half of 2021. Supply-chain bottlenecks have not yet eased, overseas inflationary pressures have increased, and labor markets in the advanced economies have seen structural shifts. Looking ahead, COVID-19, inflation, and macro policy adjustments in the advanced economies remain highly uncertain. Potential economic and financial risks arising from such uncertainties should not be neglected. 1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies The global resurgence of COVID-19 cases has disrupted the economic recovery. Omicron, the new variant, is still spreading throughout the world. Daily confirmed new cases globally peaked at nearly 4 million since January 2022. At one time, daily new cases exceeded 1 million in the U.S. The resurgence of COVID-19 has persistently prolonged supply-chain strains and amplified uncertainties related to the global economic recovery. In December 2021, the PMI in the U.S., the euro area, and Japan was 58.7, 58, and 54.3, respectively, down 2.4 percentage points, 0.4 percentage points, and 0.2 percentage points from the previous month. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank have recently revised downward their global growth forecasts for 2022. Using the composite leading indicator, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has concluded that growth rates in the U.S., Europe, Japan, and the UK may have peaked at end-2021. Commodity prices surged, while inflation in the advanced economies increased. Factors such as extreme weather and geopolitical tensions continued to push up oil and gas prices. In January 2022, the price of Brent Crude Oil Futures rose above USD90 a barrel, a new high since October 2014. The price of natural gas futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange was once above USD6.3 per million British thermal units, a record high since April 2010. Inflation went up in the advanced economies. In December 2021, the CPI was up by 7 percent year on year in the U.S., a new high since 1982. The HICP rose by 5 percent in the euro area. Inflation also remained elevated in the emerging economies. In December, the IPCA in Brazil and the CPI in Russia were up by 10.1 percent and 8.4 percent year on year, respectively. The labor shortage has worsened in the advanced economies where the labor market has seen structural changes. The unemployment rate in the major advanced economies moved closer to pre-COVID-19 levels, while the labor participation rate remained low, resulting in an insufficient labor supply. First, people are less willing to work. The elderly have retired early due to health concerns, women have quit their jobs to take care of their families, and young people have adopted a wait-and-see attitude without any imminent need to look for jobs. There was a wave of many resignations in the U.S. where a new record high of 4.5 million people resigned in November 2021, and job vacancies remained above 10 million for six consecutive months. Second, massive fiscal subsidies in response to COVID-19 are a disincentive to work. This is more salient in the U.S., as direct subsidies to households and individuals are higher in the U.S. than in Europe. Third, trade unions have grown more powerful in some countries. They have stronger bargaining power, demanding higher wages and better compensation. Global financial markets were more volatile. The resurgence of COVID-19, the economic slowdown, and rising inflation have made investors more sensitive, leading to larger fluctuations in the capital markets. The major stock indices in the advanced economies began a downward correction in September and November 2021 and January 2022. In the meantime, driven by expectations of a monetary policy shift and growing risk aversion, the U.S. Dollar Index and the yields on U.S. Treasuries moved upwards. From end-August to end-December 2021, the U.S. Dollar Index rose from below 93 to near 96. The yield on 10-year U.S. Treasuries edged up from 1.3 percent to 1.52 percent and recently even further to above 2 percent, higher than the pre-COVID level at end-2019.2. Monetary policies in the major economies The major advanced economies sped up their monetary policy shifts. The Federal Reserve accelerated monetary policy tightening. It reduced asset purchases by USD15 billion in November and December 2021, and by USD30 billion per month starting from January 2022 (USD20 billion for Treasury securities and USD10 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities), bringing them to an end in March 2022. The Federal Reserve indicated in January 2022 that a rate hike would soon be appropriate and it would start to reduce the size of the balance sheet faster and more significantly than in the previous cycle after the first rate hike. The European Central Bank (ECB) announced in December 2021 that it would slow the pace of net purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase program (PEPP) and discontinue them at the end of March 2022. Its Governing Council decided to increase monthly net purchases from EUR20 billion to EUR40 billion in the second quarter of 2022 and to EUR30 billion in the third quarter under the asset purchase program (APP). From October 2022 onwards, it will maintain net asset purchases under the APP at a monthly pace of EUR20 billion and it expects net purchases to end shortly before raising the key interest rates. The Bank of England raised the rate by an unexpected 15 basis points (bps) to 0.25 percent in December 2021 and raised it further by 25 bps to 0.5 percent in February 2022. It also decided to start reducing its balance sheet. The Bank of Japan will end additional purchases of commercial paper and corporate bonds by end-March 2022 as scheduled to allow its holdings to gradually fall back to the pre-COVID level of about JPY5 trillion. Among other central banks, the Bank of Korea, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Norges Bank all raised rates twice in 2021, each by a total of 50 bps. The Bank of Canada put an end to quantitative easing, while the Reserve Bank of Australia cut the size of bond purchases and exited yield curve control. Several emerging economies raised interest rates a number of times. To address inflationary pressures, capital outflows, and currency depreciations, the major emerging economies hiked rates several times in 2021. The central banks of Brazil and Russia both increased their rates seven times by a total of 725 bps and 425 bps, respectively, the Bank of Mexico raised its rate five times by a total of 150 bps, and the South African Reserve Bank hiked its rate once by 25 bps. 3. Issues that merit attention COVID-19 remains a major variable in global economic and financial developments. Given possible virus variants and the spread of Omicron in several places, the global path of COVID-19 is highly uncertain. In the short term, disruptions from COVID-19 will weigh down on the recovery of production and supply, which will slow down the global economic recovery. In the medium and long term, the persistence of COVID-19 will not only widen the gap among different economies, industries, businesses, and income groups but will also undermine human capital accumulation and labor supply, as some people may be forced to leave the labor force permanently due to limited access to education, leaving a scarring effect on long-term global growth. The macro policy shift in the major advanced economies is a huge external uncertainty in 2022. On the monetary policy front, the central banks in most advanced economies have changed their policy stance. The Federal Reserve鈥檚 policy shift of 鈥渞educing bond purchases 鈥� raising interest rates 鈥� shrinking balance sheets鈥� is clear and its tightening statement exceeds market expectations. The Bank of England has successively hiked the rate twice, and the ECB has also announced that the pace of bond purchases would be slowed down. On the fiscal policy front, the IMF forecast that the fiscal deficit in the U.S., the euro area, Japan, and the UK would drop from 10.8 percent, 7.7 percent, 9.0 percent, and 11.9 percent in 2021 to 6.9 percent, 3.4 percent, 3.9 percent, and 5.6 percent in 2022, respectively. Marginal convergence has become a prominent feature in the countries鈥� fiscal policies. It should be noted that global financial vulnerabilities have increased since the outbreak of COVID-19 amid rapidly rising asset prices and higher debts. Therefore, a policy exit in the advanced economies may not only trigger large asset-price corrections but also bring spillovers to the emerging economies through trade, capital flows, financial markets, and other channels. Properly addressing potential risks requires stronger international coordination. There remain disputes over how long high inflation will persist, and the deanchoring of inflation expectations should be avoided. The COVID-induced supplychain bottlenecks and disruptions, the wage-price spiral caused by structural labor shortages, the rising commodity prices and their pass-through effects, and the ultraloose monetary policy in the advanced economies have all contributed to a sharp increase in overseas inflation. How these factors will evolve and when their impact will recede remain highly uncertain. At present, inflation expectations in the advanced economies are still elevated even though inflationary pressures have already reached highs that have rarely been seen in years. Policy makers need to watch closely the risk of de-anchoring and prevent inflation from spreading. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In 2021, though facing the changes unseen in a century, severe COVID-19 around the world and complex and complicated situations at home and abroad, China鈥檚 economy sustained a steady recovery, new achievements were made in high-quality development, and the 14th Five-Year Plan achieved a good start. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in 2021 grew by 8.1 percent year on year to RMB114.3670 trillion on a comparable basis, and the average growth rate of GDP during the past two years was 5.1 percent. By quarters, GDP in Q1 grew by 18.3 percent year on year, while that in Q2, Q3, and Q4 grew by 7.9 percent, 4.9 percent, and 4.0 percent year on year, respectively. 1. Consumption and investments rebounded steadily, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth. The increase in residents鈥� income kept pace with economic growth, and consumption grew steadily. In 2021, the country鈥檚 per capita disposable income reached RMB35128, increasing by 9.1 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 8.1 percent in real terms, with the average growth rate during the past two years at 5.1 percent. The structure of income distribution continuously improved, and the per capita income gap between urban and rural residents narrowed. According to the Urban Depositors鈥� Survey conducted by the PBC in Q4, 24.7 percent of residents were inclined to 鈥渃onsume more,鈥� up 0.6 percentage points from Q3 and up 1.4 percentage points year on year, respectively. In 2021, total retail sales of consumer goods grew by 12.5 percent year on year, with the average growth rate during the past two years at 3.9 percent. Investments grew steadily with an improved structure. In 2021, total fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households) increased by 4.9 percent year on year, with the average growth rate during the past two years registering 3.9 percent. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 13.5 percent, 8.6 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments, with the average growth rate during the past two years registering at 4.8 percent. Investments in real estate development increased by 4.4 percent, with the average growth rate during the past two years registering at 5.7 percent. Investments in infrastructure increased by 0.4 percent year on year, with the average growth rate during the past two years registering 0.3 percent. In terms of industries, investments in the high-tech industry grew by 17.1 percent year on year, 12.2 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in health and education grew by 24.5 percent and 11.7 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports expanded rapidly. In 2021, imports and exports of goods grew by 21.4 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 21.2 percent year on year and imports grew by 21.5 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods posting RMB4.3687 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share of imports and exports under general trade increasing by 1.6 percentage points year on year. Exports of machinery and electronics increased by 20.4 percent year on year, accounting for 59 percent of total exports. Imports and exports to the countries along the Belt and Road and the RCEP (the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership) trading partners grew by 23.6 percent and 18.1 percent, respectively. Our trading partners are becoming more diversified. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In 2021, actually utilized FDI increased by 14.9 percent year on year to RMB1149.36 billion (equivalent to USD173.48 billion), growing by 20.2 percent year on year (excluding investments in banking, securities, and the insurance industry). In terms of sectors, FDI continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In 2021, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 17.1 percent year on year. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 19.2 percent year on year and actually utilized FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 10.7 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production saw a bumper harvest, industrial production continued to grow, and the service industry recovered steadily. In 2021, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in the national economy grew by 7.1 percent, 8.2 percent, and 8.2 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 7.3 percent, 39.4 percent, and 53.3 percent of GDP, respectively. Agricultural production was favorable, and animal husbandry grew steadily. In 2021, the country鈥檚 total grain output grew by 2.0 percent year on year, and annual output has been over 650 million tons for seven successive years. The output of summer grains, early season rice, and autumn grains all increased, solidifying the position of agriculture as a ballast stone. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 16.3 percent year on year. The capacity of hog production was released rapidly, and at end-2021 hogs in stock and fertile sows in stock increased by 10.5 percent and 4.0 percent year on year, respectively. Industrial production continued to grow, and the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector saw rapid growth. In 2021, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 9.6 percent year on year, with the average growth rate during the past two years registering at 6.1 percent. Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 5.3 percent year on year. The manufacturing sector increased by 9.8 percent year on year. The electricity, heat, gas and water production, and supply sectors increased by 11.4 percent year on year. The industrial structure was continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector increased by 18.2 percent and 12.9 percent year on year, which was 8.6 percentage points and 3.3 percentage points higher, respectively, than that of the IEDS. New energy cars, industrial robots, integrated circuits, and micro computer equipment grew by 145.6 percent, 44.9 percent, 33.3 percent, and 22.3 percent year on year, respectively. Growth in the services industry recovered steadily, and the modern service industry showed sound growth momentum. Specifically, the value-added of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services, accommodation/catering services, and transportation/storage/post services maintained recovery and grew by 17.2 percent, 14.5 percent, and 12.1 percent year on year, respectively. In 2021, the Index of Service Production (ISP) increased by 13.1 percent year on year, with the average growth rate registering at 6.0 percent during the past two years. In December, the Business Activities Index for the services industry reached 52 percent, 0.9 percentage points higher than that in November. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and producer prices receded from their previous high level. Consumer prices increased moderately. Affected by the continued recovery of hog production, the relatively weak aggregate demand under COVID-19, and the high base effect, in 2021, the CPI increased by 0.9 percent year on year, down 1.6 percentage points from that in 2020. The CPI in October, November, and December rose by 1.5 percent, 2.3 percent, and 1.5 percent year on year, respectively. The main drivers of the CPI moderately increased. Food prices dropped by 1.4 percent for the whole year, decelerating by 12 percentage points from 2020. Non-food prices increased 1.4 percent for the whole year, accelerating by 1 percentage point from 2020. The core CPI (food and energy excluded) rose moderately by 0.8 percent year on year, on par with the previous year. Producer prices witnessed a remarkable rise. Due to the tight supply of global energy and raw materials, the prices of major commodities soared in 2021, driving the domestic Producer Prices Index (PPI) to surge. The PPI increased 8.1 percent year on year, accelerating by 9.9 percentage points from that in 2020. During the three months of Q4, the PPI increased 13.5 percent, 12.9 percent, and 10.3 percent year on year, respectively, representing a downward trend from the peak. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by 11 percent year on year, accelerating by 13.3 percentage points from 2020. 4. Fiscal revenue grew rapidly, and expenditures rose steadily. Fiscal revenue grew rapidly. In 2021, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB20.25 trillion, an increase of 10.7 percent and 6.4 percent in comparison with that in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Specifically, tax revenue amounted to RMB17.27 trillion, up 11.9 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue registered RMB2.98 trillion, up 4.2 percent year on year. The domestic value-added tax and domestic consumption tax rose by 11.8 percent and 15.4 percent year on year, respectively. The business income tax went up by 15.4 percent year on year, and the personal income tax grew by 21 percent year on year. In 2021, expenditures in the national general budget saw an increase of 0.3 percent year on year to RMB24.63 trillion. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures related to science and technology, education, social security, and employment grew quickly, registering year-on-year growth of 7.2 percent, 3.5 percent, and 3.4 percent, respectively.5. The employment situation remained generally stable. The surveyed urban unemployment rate declined. In 2021, 12.69 million people were newly employed, up 0.83 million from 2020. The national surveyed urban unemployment rate averaged 5.1 percent, lower than the macro-management target of 5.5 percent, registering a decrease of 0.5 percentage points year on year. The job market for major groups improved. The number of rural migrants in 2021 registered 292.51 million, up 6.91 million from end-2020, recovering to the level in end-2019. In 2021, the average monthly income of rural migrants increased by 8.8 percent year on year to RMB4,432. 6. The balance of payments and external debt. A basic equilibrium was maintained in China鈥檚 balance of payments. According to preliminary statistics, in 2021 China鈥檚 current account surplus registered USD315.7 billion, accounting for 1.8 percent of GDP, continuously remaining within a reasonable range. Specifically, according to the balance of payments statistics, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD554.5 billion, an increase of 8 percent year on year, whereas the deficit in trade in services recorded a deficit of USD97.7 billion, down 33 percent year on year. In the capital and financial account, direct investments recorded a surplus of USD204.8 billion, and reserve assets increased USD188.6 billion. By the end of 2021, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.2502 trillion, up USD33.6 billion from end-2020. At end-Q3 2021, the scale of China鈥檚 foreign debt remained stable with a slight increase. At end-September 2021, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.6965 trillion, up USD16.7 billion from end-June or an increase of 0.6 percent. The increase in foreign debt was mainly due to the additional allocation of Special Drawing Rights (SDR) to the central bank and the increase in foreign investors holding domestic RMB bonds. The term structure of foreign debt was continuously optimized. At end-September 2021, medium- and long-term foreign debt accounted for 47 percent of all foreign debt, up 3 percentage points from that at end-June, further enhancing the stability of China鈥檚 foreign debt structure. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In 2021, the real estate market in China remained generally stable. In December, among 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built residential housing prices increased by 2.0 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.7 percentage points from 2020. Second-hand residential housing prices increased by 1.0 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.1 percentage points from the previous year. In 2021, total floor area of sold units increased by 1.9 percent year on year, registering an average growth of 2.3 percent during the past two years. Housing sales increased by 4.8 percent year on year, registering an average growth of 6.7 percent during the past two years. Investments in real estate development grew by 4.4 percent year on year, registering an average growth of 5.7 percent during the past two years. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 6.4 percent year on year, registering an average growth of 7.0 percent during the past two years and accounting for 75.3 percent of total investments in real estate development. On the whole, growth of real estate loans remained stable. At end-2021, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 7.9 percent year on year to RMB52.2 trillion, a deceleration of 3.7 percentage points from end-2020. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 11.3 percent year on year to RMB38.3 trillion, a deceleration of 3.3 percentage points from end-2020. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 0.5 percent year on year to RMB9.1 trillion, a deceleration of 7.7 percentage points from end-2020. 7.2 The automobile industry In 2021, the automobile industry in China rose to the challenges triggered by COVID- 19 and the supply-chain shocks such as the chip shortage. In general, the automobile industry operated smoothly with the following characteristics. First, both production and sales maintained steady growth. In 2021, the volume of automobile production and sales reached 26.082 million and 26.275 million, respectively, increasing by 3.4 percent and 3.8 percent year on year, respectively. Second, profitability remained relatively stable. According to the National Bureau of Statistics of China, in 2021 revenue in the automobile manufacturing industry rose by 6.7 percent year on year. Total profits, even with the increased raw material prices, still expanded by 1.9 percent. Third, the rapid growth in automobile exports continued. In 2021, a total of 2.015 million automobiles were exported, a rise of 101.1 percent from 2020. Fourth, production and sales of new energy vehicles surged. In 2021, the volume of new energy vehicle production and sales both increased by 160 percent year on year to 3.545 million and 3.521 million, respectively, accounting for 13.4 percent of market share. However, as COVID-19 resurged globally and repeatedly, chip shortages posed a significant threat to production chains in the automobile industry in the following respects. First, affected by the COVID-19 disruption and several events in chip production areas such as the earthquake in Japan and the blizzard in Texas, major chip producers in the world faced reduced production to varying degrees or even halted production. Even though some producers, including the Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, announced plans to expand production, it still took time for the extra chips to be manufactured. Second, a variety of chips is needed for a finished automobile. Although manufacturers proactively purchased chips, there were serious structural mismatches in the various chips required for automobile manufacturing. Third, development of the stay-at-home economy sped up against the backdrop of COVID-19, so the demand for chips for electronics and smart products grew. This squeezed some production capacity of automotive chips to deliver lower profits. The chip shortage is forecast to likely last until the second half of 2022. Coupled with the said issues, China鈥檚 automobile industry faces some other challenges in the 鈥�14th Five-Year Plan鈥� period. For one thing, the new energy technology is yet to be mature, so the green and low-carbon transition faces great pressures. The costs for a finished new energy vehicle are still too high. The industry faces problems such as a lack of security, practicability, and facility in its overall development as well as a shortage of raw materials, such as lithium, cobalt, and nickel. While carbon emissions are remarkably lower from driving electric vehicles, they remain high in the production process. For another, the trade of automobiles lacks efficiency. There are still noticeable disparities between mature international automobile markets and China鈥檚 automobile markets, including the markets of new automobiles, second-hand automobiles, scrapped automobiles, and the automobile aftermarket. According to the statistics of Verband der Automobilindustrie (VDA), in 2021 the ratio of the volume of second-hand automobile trade to that of new automobile trade in China was only one-sixth of that in the U.S. The automobile industry is one of the pillars of the economy and because its carbon emissions account for 7.5 percent of total carbon emissions in China, it remains a focus for achieving the carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060. Moving forward, following the Mid-to Long-term Development Plan for the Automobile Industry and the Development Plan for the New Energy Vehicle Industry (2021-2035), China鈥檚 automobile industry will develop in a high-quality and sustainable manner with the following measures. First, the supply-chain system will be built, improved, and elevated to shore up the weak link in chips. Technology, as the key, will be emphasized. The country will hasten the pace of researching and developing critical technologies such as automotive chips, and it will guide enterprises to upgrade their supply-chain arrangements to enhance stability, security, and competitiveness. Second, research and development for new energy technology will accelerate with coordinated arrangements for carbon emissions reductions in all links. More resources will be channeled to researching and developing core technologies like fuel cells and intelligent connected vehicles. Also, the supply of raw materials as well as new materials and appliances will be secured further. The development and application of new materials and devices will be improved. Third, China will pick up speed in boosting intelligent manufacturing, diversifying transportation services, greening the life cycle of automobile products, and building a new ecological system for the automobile industry characterized by full connectedness, good coordination, high efficiency, situational awareness, and intelligent decisions. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I锛嶰utlook for the Chinese economy The year 2021 is a milestone in the history of China and the Communist Party of China (CPC). We celebrated the 100th anniversary of the CPC, accomplished the first Centennial Goal, and started the march toward our second centenary. Facing COVID- 19, changes unseen in a century as well as complex domestic and global situations, China maintained a leading status in both economic growth and COVID-19 control under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core. GDP in China in 2021 recorded year-on-year growth of 8.1 percent, contributing about 25 percent to global economic growth. Per capita GDP reached USD12,500. In addition, the CPI grew 0.9 percent year on year, and the newlyemployed urban population reached 12.69 million, achieving an optimized combination of relatively high growth, low inflation, and high employment. With new progress in high-quality development, the 14th Five-Year Plan opened to a good start. The Chinese economy recovered and stabilized in Q4 2021. GDP grew 4.0 percent year on year, averaging 5.2 percent for the past two years and rising 0.3 percentage points from Q3. Agriculture in Q4 maintained rapid growth, the industrial sector continued to grow, and the service sector steadily recovered. Residential income was basically in line with economic growth, and consumption potential continued to accumulate. The structure of fixed-asset investments improved, while manufacturing and high-tech industries were a prominent force driving investment. Exports witnessed strong momentum and a growing share of the global market. Employment was stable overall, and support for the people鈥檚 livelihood was effective. The sound monetary policy was flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. Priority was given to intertemporal adjustments and cross-year policy arrangements. Monetary policy was more forward-looking, stable, targeted, effective, and independent. Money and credit maintained steady growth. Rates on corporate loans were the lowest since the reform and opening-up was introduced more than forty years ago. The financial sector continued to provide solid support for the real economy. Meanwhile, a deluge of strong stimulus was avoided, and the macro leverage ratio dropped for a fifth consecutive quarter. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, playing the role of an auto stabilizer for the macro economy and the balance of payments. However, it should be noted that the Chinese economy is facing combined pressures from shrinking demand, supply shocks, and waning expectations, and the external environment is becoming more serious and complex with increased uncertainties. COVID-19, inflation, and the policy adjustments of the advanced economies are the three major sources of uncertainty. The Omicron variant spread rapidly in Europe, America, and other countries. The highest number of daily global cases approached four million. The IMF and the World Bank lowered growth projections for 2022 as the global economic outlook became uncertain. Inflation is rising in the major advanced economies, and supply bottlenecks have not been resolved. As the Federal Reserve expressed that it would raise interest rates and shrink its balance sheet, the market expects a faster tightening of its policy, thereby increasing the risks related to global capital flows and financial market adjustments. The domestic economy faces downward pressures as COVID-19 unfolds with uncertainty and therefore suppresses consumption. In addition, investments in some sectors have not bottomed out, and there are medium-to long-term challenges including slower potential economic growth and population growth, and the low-carbon transition. In response, it is necessary to remain confident while being aware of the difficulties. The fundamentals for long-term steady growth are unchanged, and the favorable conditions for building a new development paradigm are unchanged. Therefore, the PBC will focus on fulfilling its responsibilities to achieve high-quality development. Inflation pressures are generally controllable. The CPI in 2021 averaged 0.9 percent. Its average range in the next stage will likely rise moderately from the past year and continue to fit within a reasonable range. Meanwhile, year-on-year PPI growth dropped after a temporary surge. The global supply-demand gap will likely close up in the coming stage. Combined with a gradually emerging high-base effect, PPI growth in 2022 is expected to continue to decline. Overall, supply and demand in the Chinese economy are basically stable. The PBC is carrying out a normal monetary policy, which will help price movements to remain stable for the medium and long term.II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines made at the 19th CPC National Congress, the plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, and the Central Economic Work Conference. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully, and comprehensively, deepen the supplyside structural reform, accelerate the building of a new development paradigm, build a modern central banking system, improve the modern monetary policy framework, and promote high-quality development. Adhering to the principle of giving top priority to stability while pursuing progress, the PBC will take active measures to implement the guidelines of the Central Economic Work Conference. It will step up financial support for the real economy and continue to do its part well in ensuring stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and expectations, and in maintaining security in six areas, namely, employment, people's basic livelihood, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, and the normal functioning of primarylevel governments. Striving to maintain macroeconomic stability, the PBC will create a favorable monetary and financial environment to keep economic indicators within a reasonable range and to gear up for the opening of the 20th CPC National Congress. The PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate, strengthen intertemporal adjustments, and give proper play to the dual role of monetary policy tools in both aggregate and structural terms. Placing emphasis on the adequacy, targetedness, and foresightedness of policy measures, it will meet the reasonable and bona fide financing demands of the real economy while refraining from adopting a deluge of strong stimulus measures, and it will focus on stepping up financial support for key fields and weak links to achieve both stable aggregates and an optimal structure. The first aim is to maintain stable growth in monetary and credit aggregates. The PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, guide financial institutions to vigorously increase credit supply, and make the growth of credit aggregates more stable. With these efforts, it is expected that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will continue to be basically in line with nominal economic growth and that the macro leverage ratio will remain basically stable. The second aim is to steadily optimize the credit structure. Structural monetary policy tools will be used actively to provide additional support as needed. The PBC will put into operation the market-oriented policy tools supporting micro and small businesses (MSBs), and it will make effective use of the Carbon Emissions Reduction Facility as well as targeted central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal. Financial institutions will be guided to ramp up credit supply to regions with slow credit growth and to intensify targeted support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, green development, and other key fields as well as weak links. The third aim is to bring down the overall financing costs for businesses. The PBC will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by tapping into the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, stabilizing bank liability costs, and guiding loan rates for businesses to move downwards. The fourth aim is to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Focusing on domestic conditions and based on market supply and demand, the PBC will enhance RMB exchange rate flexibility and bring into play the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. It will strengthen macro-prudential management of cross-border capital flows, stress expectation management, guide market entities to be risk-neutral, and properly balance internal and external equilibria. In the meantime, the PBC will uphold bottom-line thinking, enhance systemic awareness, and make coordinated efforts to forestall and defuse major financial risks based on market principles and the rule of law. First, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth in money and credit. It will keep a close watch on marginal changes in the economic and financial situations at home and abroad while reinforcing monitoring and analysis of uncertainties, such as fiscal revenue and expenditures, issuances of government bonds, cash injections and withdrawals, and monetary policy adjustments made by the major economies. A mix of monetary policy tools will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to guide market rates to move around the policy rates. The PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, continue to ease liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on bank credit supply, cultivate and stimulate credit demand from the real economy, guide financial institutions to vigorously increase credit supply, and make the growth of credit aggregates more stable so that the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE will be basically in line with nominal economic growth. It will improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment by replenishing capital for commercial banks through multiple channels and stepping up support for small and medium-sized banks in their issuance of perpetual bonds and other capital replenishment instruments, thereby improving the capacity of banks to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will continue to bring into play the guiding role of structural monetary policy tools. It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable to carry on inclusive and sustained funding support for agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private enterprises while guiding financial institutions to increase credit supply to regions with slow credit growth. The PBC will implement the arrangements for the conversion of the two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy, intensify financial support for MSBs, and make continued efforts to increase the volume, lower the prices, and expand the coverage of inclusive loans to MSBs so that they can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and safeguarding employment. Effective steps will be taken to put into operation the Carbon Emissions Reduction Facility as well as targeted central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal. Eligible financial institutions will be encouraged to lend at preferential interest rates to key projects that significantly reduce carbon emissions. Moreover, the PBC will support clean and efficient use of coal as well as coal-fired power and will promote the transition to a green and low-carbon economy while ensuring a secure energy supply. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. It will strengthen capacity building to improve financial services for micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and will guide financial institutions to continue ramping up their issuances of first-time loans, renewed loans and unsecured loans, aiming to set up a long-term mechanism whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism to provide loans. It will increase the availability of supply-chain financing to MSMEs and improve the supporting mechanisms for MSME financing. With more work to be done to consolidate and expand the achievements in poverty eradication, the PBC will promote financial support for the development of the seed industry, new types of agribusinesses, agricultural and rural infrastructure development, and other key fields, and it will guide financial institutions to come up with innovative services and products in order to better meet the diversified financing needs of agro-related businesses. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices, and expectations and to implementing the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance. It will increase financial support for the rental of housing, protect the legitimate rights and interests of consumers in the market, better meet the reasonable housing needs of home buyers, and promote the healthy development of the real estate market to foster a virtuous circle. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system and guiding market rates to move around the policy rates. The PBC will tap into the LPR reform and give full play to its role in optimizing resource allocations. It will push financial institutions by market means to allocate more financial resources to MSBs so that competition will rise in the MSB loan market and the overall financing costs for MSBs will stabilize and fall. By encouraging the implementation of measures to improve the oversight of deposit rates, the PBC will regulate competition in the deposit market, stabilize bank liability costs, guide loan rates for businesses to move downwards, and be committed to reducing the overall financing costs for businesses. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, and bring into play the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. Furthermore, it will strengthen expectation management and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market. Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for the MSMEs with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept, on reducing the costs of exchange rate risk hedging for the MSMEs, and on strengthening risk management of their foreign exchange businesses, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. The PBC will continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by further expanding use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepening international monetary cooperation, and developing offshore RMB markets. In addition, it will conduct pilot projects for the high-quality opening-up of cross-border trade and investment, further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account. Fifth, the PBC will make continued efforts to deepen financial reform, and it will accelerate steps to move ahead with financial market institutional building. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, it will deepen the reform of large commercial banks and establish a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. The reform of development financial institutions and policy financial institutions will continue, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities. In this way, they will better play their roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBC will optimize the administrative framework for the issuance of financial bonds and steadily promote the higher-quality opening-up of the bond market. It will also enhance the efficiency and interconnectivity of the multi-tiered market system and cultivate diversified and qualified investors. More work will be done to improve the legal system for the bond market, to tighten requirements for information disclosures, and to strengthen regulation over intermediary institutions. Meanwhile, the PBC will act in a timely way to forestall and defuse bond market risks. Based on market principles and the rule of law, it will see to it that all concerned parties fulfill their responsibilities. It will continue to put into practice the newly formed mechanisms for bond default resolution, improve the mechanism for unified law enforcement, and crack down on illegal and irregular conduct in the bond market. Sixth, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential management system as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning. The PBC will strengthen regulation over systemically important financial institutions and will pick up pace in pushing China鈥檚 global systemically important banks to establish a sound long-term mechanism for the management of total loss-absorbing capacity and to effectively enhance their risk prevention abilities. It will give further play to the role of deposit insurance as a platform for market-oriented resolution while exploring a number of market-oriented and law-based approaches to support small and medium-sized banks in defusing risks and replenishing capital. The PBC will accelerate its work to improve the system of modern financial regulations, act quickly to shore up the weaknesses in the regulatory framework, and strengthen regulation over financial holding companies. Continuing to follow the principles of 鈥渕aintaining overall stability, making coordinated efforts, taking different approaches based on different conditions, and defusing bombs with precision,鈥� it will resolve the risks of institutions of concern in a prudent and orderly manner, improve regulatory coordination, and contain any possible resurgence of risks. The PBC will work to ensure that all concerned parties fulfill their respective responsibilities, and it will promote a mechanism for fiscal and financial risk resolution led by major local officials in order to join efforts in risk resolution. It will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability to hold to account those responsible for major financial risks and to effectively prevent moral hazards.
Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and has implemented the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. It has kept its sound monetary policy flexible and appropriate, and it has given full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy instruments. Money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) have grown reasonably, the credit structure has improved continuously, and overall financing costs have steadily declined, with financial support for the real economy continuously enhanced. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has given top priority to the stability of monetary policy, made progress while maintaining stability, and taken quick measures at an early stage based on developments of the macro situations. It has adopted a mix of tools, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, turning over profits, the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs) to provide liquidity. It has also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner and has kept liquidity in the banking system adequate at a reasonable level. In January 2022, the PBC guided both OMO rates and MLF rates to go down by ten basis points. Short-term interest rates in the money market floated around the OMO rates with a further decline in its volatility, which provided proper liquidity for stabilizing the macro economy and keeping the economic indicators within a reasonable range. At end-March 2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.7 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year. II. Lending by financial institutions grew moderately, and loan interest rates decreased further Stability of total credit growth was enhanced. In response to the implications of uncertainties at home and abroad, the PBC took proactive and quick measures at an early stage. It guided financial institutions to grant loans in a reasonable manner, facilitating a year-on-year acceleration of loans in Q1 2022 and thereby providing a robust back for stabilizing the macro economy. At end-March, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 11.0 percent year on year to RMB207.0 trillion, an increase of RMB8.5 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB466.3 billion. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 11.4 percent year on year to RMB201.0 trillion, up RMB8.3 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB663.6 billion. The credit structure improved continuously. At end-March, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB3.9 trillion from the beginning of the year, accounting for 55.8 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year （YOY） growth of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 29.5 percent, 18.1 percentage points higher than the growth of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) grew by 24.6 percent year on year to RMB20.8 trillion. These loans supported 50.39 million MSBs, a rise of 42.9 percent year on year.Box 1 Remarkable Progress in Improving the Modern Monetary Policy Framework Improving the modern monetary policy framework is an important part of building a modern central banking system. It serves as an institutional base for implementing the sound monetary policy well and for conducting an intertemporal policy design, and it also satisfies the intrinsic need to promote high-quality development. In recent years, improvements in the modern monetary policy framework have made remarkable progress. According to the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC has improved the mechanism for money supply management, enhanced the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, innovated and expanded the system of monetary policy instruments, and optimized the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism. First, the mechanism for money supply management has been improved. According to the guidelines of the Central Economic Work Conference and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government, growth of broad money (M2) and outstanding AFRE should match the nominal economic growth. The PBC has precisely identified banks as the direct subject of money supply, and it has improved the mechanism for money supply management by bringing into shape longterm mechanisms for liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints. It comprehensively utilizes a wide array of monetary policy instruments to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to alleviate liquidity constraints. From 2018 to 2021, the average growth of M2 in China was 9 percent. The PBC has seen perpetual bonds as a breakthrough in motivating banks to replenish capital via multiple channels so as to ease capital constraints. In January 2019, the first perpetual bond of the banking sector was issued. As of end-March 2022, banks have cumulatively issued RMB1.8915 trillion worth of perpetual bonds, motivating banks to issue loans of approximately RMB10 trillion. Overall corporate financing costs have dropped steadily, which has eased interest rate constraints. The weighted average interest rate on loans to enterprises gradually declined to 4.36 percent in March 2022, a record low since statistics became available. From 2018 to 2021, the average growth of M2 was virtually on par with the nominal GDP growth of 8.3 percent over the same period. This has contributed to the long-term optimized combination of economic growth, price stability, and full employment. Second, the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism has been enhanced. In line with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, in August 2019 the PBC released a notice on the reform and improvement of the loan prime rate (LPR) formation mechanism. The reformed LPR is based on market-oriented quotes by panel banks that take into account the trend in market rates with reference to the MLF rate. This has not only made loan rates more market-based but it has also developed a transmission mechanism featuring “market rates+central bank’s guidance→LPR→loan rates,” making monetary policy transmission much more efficient. At present, the pricing of new loans basically uses the LPR as the benchmark, and the shift to the LPR as the pricing benchmark was completed in August 2020 for outstanding floating-rate loans. Meanwhile, the PBC continues to optimize regulation of deposit rates. In June 2021, it guided the selfregulatory mechanism for interest rates to modify the self-regulated ceiling of deposit rates by adding a margin to the benchmark interest rates. The PBC has strengthened regulation of non-standard deposit innovation products and has maintained orderly competition in the deposit market. In April 2022, it guided the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rates to establish a market-oriented adjustment mechanism of deposit rates, and it motivated banks to reasonably adjust deposit rates in accordance with the changes in market rates, which made deposit rates more market-oriented. In terms of effectiveness, since the LPR reform in August 2019, the weighted average rates on enterprise loans has declined from 5.32 percent in July 2019 to 4.36 percent in March 2022, or a cumulative drop of 0.96 percentage points, higher than the 0.55 percentagepoint drop in the LPR over the same period. This has effectively promoted an ongoing notable drop in the real loan rates and has largely eased the financing difficulties long faced by the MSBs and has lowered their financing costs. Third, the system of monetary policy instruments has been innovated and improved. The PBC has accommodated the intrinsic need for high-quality development, attached importance to introducing an incentive compatibility mechanism, innovated and applied structural monetary policy instruments, and guided financial institutions to step up support for relevant areas in line with the new development concept. Since 2018, it has cut the reserve requirement ratio (RRR) for 13 times, releasing long-term funding worth approximately RMB10.8 trillion. At endApril 2022, the average RRR for financial institutions stood at 8.1 percent, 6.8 percentage points lower than that at the beginning of 2018. Instruments such as central bank lending and discounts have been adopted. At the beginning of 2021, an additional RMB200 billion of central bank lending was made available to ten provinces (regions) with slow credit growth. To promote coordinated regional development, the PBC adopted a multi-pronged approach when guiding financial institutions to provide more credit to regions with slow credit growth. In November 2021, the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coal were launched in parallel to precisely promote green and low-carbon development. Since January 1, 2022, the two monetary policy instruments that directly support the real economy have been converted into market-oriented policy instruments in support of MSBs. In particular, the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans was converted into an instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans. For inclusive MSB loans issued by eligible locally incorporated banks, the PBC offers incentive funds, which are 1 percent of the increment in the MSB loan balance. The support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans was incorporated into management of central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs. The RMB400 billion central bank lending originally arranged to support inclusive unsecured MSB loans can be rolled over. Recently, special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and inclusive elderly care has been launched to motivate financial institutions to step up support for these two areas. At end-March 2022, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs was RMB20.8 trillion, 2.5 times that at the beginning of 2018. These loans supported 50.39 million MSBs, 2.2 times that at end-2018. The weighted average interest rate on new inclusive loans to MSBs posted 4.93 percent in 2021, a drop of 0.22 percentage points from 2020 and of 1.38 percentage points from 2018. Fourth, the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate has been advanced so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC has exited from regular interventions in the foreign exchange market, and market supply and demand now play a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate. While giving play to the exchange rate as a pricing signal, it has enhanced the efficiency of resource allocation. The PBC has stuck to the market-oriented reform, enhanced the RMB exchange rate flexibility, given play to the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer for the macro economy and the balance of payments, and promoted a balance between internal and external equilibria. The PBC has established and has continuously improved macro-prudential management for cross-border financing, employed instruments such as the RRR for foreign currency deposits, and guided financial institutions to optimize management of foreign exchange assets. It has guided enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, enhanced expectation management, and maintained the smooth operation of the foreign exchange market. Since 2018, the RMB exchange rate has withstood a variety of major external shocks with enhanced flexibility and it has played its role as an automatic stabilizer for the macro economy and the balance of payments. The RMB exchange rate has witnessed appreciations and depreciations, moving in both directions and remaining basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. From 2018 to 2021, there were 973 trading days on China’s foreign exchange market, during which the central parity of the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar appreciated on 485 days, depreciated on 487 days, and remained unchanged on one day. At end-March 2022, the central parity RMB exchange rate against the US dollar was 6.3482, appreciating 0.4 percent compared with the end of the previous year. Going forward, the PBC will continue to improve the framework for a modern monetary policy, promote high-quality development, and accelerate the building of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulation reinforcing each other. Loan interest rates decreased further. Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has continuously deepened the market-oriented reform of interest rates. It has tapped into the effects of the LPR reform and given play to its role in guiding interest rates, thereby enhancing competition in the credit market. In the meantime, the PBC has improved regulation of deposit rates, promoted a further drop in actual loan rates, and guided financial institutions to cut profits in favor of the real economy. In March, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.70 percent and 4.60 percent, respectively, down 0.10 percentage point and 0.05 percentage point from December 2021, respectively. In March, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.65 percent, down 0.45 percentage point year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.98 percent, down 0.32 percentage point year on year, while that on corporate lending fell by 0.27 percentage point year on year to 4.36 percent. In March, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 66.95 percent, 7.63 percent, and 25.42 percent, respectively. Compared with end-2021, as a whole, the floating range of RMB loan rates around the LPR moved downward. Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In March, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on largevalue USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 0.12 percent and 0.53 percent, respectively, up 0.02 and 0.22 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USDdenominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six months registered 1.40 percent and 1.54 percent, respectively, up 0.29 percentage poinst and 0.43 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. Deposits grew steadily. At end-March, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies of all financial institutions increased 9.9 percent year on year to RMB249.7 trillion, up RMB11.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB2.3 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 10.0 percent year on year to RMB243.1 trillion, an increase of RMB10.9 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB2.5 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD1.0 trillion, an increase of USD49.4 billion from the beginning of 2022 and a deceleration of USD18.1 billion.III. Money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at a reasonable pace Money and credit aggregates maintained reasonable growth, providing strong support for the real economy. Outstanding M2 recorded RMB249.8 trillion at end-March, increasing 9.7 percent year on year. Outstanding M1 and M0 registered RMB64.5 trillion and RMB9.5 trillion, respectively, increasing 4.7 percent and 9.9 percent year on year. The first quarter of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB431.7 billion, which was RMB208.8 billion more than that in the same period of the previous year. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB325.64 trillion at end-March. Year-on-year growth registered 10.6 percent, up 0.3 percentage points compared with the growth recorded at end-2021. The AFRE increment in Q1 2022 totaled RMB12.06 trillion, an increase of RMB1.77 trillion year on year. Growth of money supply and the AFRE featured the following: first, RMB loans witnessed a significantly larger year-on-year increase. In Q1, RMB loans issued to the real economy increased by RMB8.34 trillion, RMB425.8 billion more as compared to the same period of 2021. Second, government bonds, corporate bonds, and domestic equity financing by non-financial enterprises exhibited a larger year-on-year increase, RMB923.8 billion, RMB405 billion, and RMB51.5 billion more than those in the corresponding period of the previous year, respectively. Third, trust loans recorded a smaller year-on-year decrease, while undiscounted bankers’ acceptances registered a smaller year-on-year increase. In Q1, the year-on-year increase of entrusted loans was RMB51 billion more than that in Q1 2021; the year-on-year decrease of trust loans was RMB187.9 billion less than that in Q1 2021; and the year-on-year increase of undiscounted bankers’ acceptances was RMB245.4 billion less than that in Q1 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions witnessed a larger year-on-year decrease, while loans written off exhibited a larger year-on-year increase. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level Since the beginning of 2022, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and market expectations have been generally stable. The market has played a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, and the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In Q1, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate appreciated modestly against a basket of currencies. At end-March, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 104.28 and 102.11, respectively, both up 1.8 percent from end-2021. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end-2021 to endMarch 2022, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 2.2 percent and 0.6 percent, respectively, and from 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism began to endMarch 2022, appreciation of the NEER and the REER of the RMB registered 52 percent and 59.1 percent, respectively. In Q1, the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar witnessed a slight appreciation. At end-March, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.3482, appreciating 0.4 percent from end-2021 and 30.4 percent on a cumulative basis since the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism in 2005. In Q1, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 2.9 percent. In Q1, cross-border RMB settlements increased 8 percent year on year to RMB9.7 trillion, with RMB receipts and payments posting RMB4.8 trillion and RMB4.9 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 23 percent year on year to RMB2.1 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB1.6 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and under other items registered RMB478.3 billion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB7.6 trillion, increasing 5 percent year on year. Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q1 2022, with resolute implementation of the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, and in line with the requirements for pursuing stability as the top priority and seeking progress while ensuring stability, the PBC placed emphasis on the foresightedness of policy measures, kept the sound monetary policy flexible and appropriate, enhanced intertemporal adjustments, gave full play to the dual functions of monetary policy tools in adjusting the credit aggregate and structure, kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, strengthened stability of aggregate credit growth, further brought down actual lending rates from a relatively low basis, and guided financial institutions to ramp up support for the real economy, especially micro and small businesses (MSBs), tech innovation, and green development, thereby forcefully contributing to stabilizing the entire macro economy. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. In Q1, the PBC strengthened the monitoring and analysis of factors affecting liquidity supply and demand, such as cash injections during the Spring Festival, government bond issuances, and quarter-end regulatory assessments as well as development of COVID-19. The central bank made intertemporal arrangements, conducted open market operations in a flexible manner, and kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. Before the Spring Festival, it launched 14-day reverse repos in time to release cross-festival liquidity, and it managed the operation volume in a flexible manner so as to offset short-term disruptions, such as a cash injection peak, and to meet the institutions’ cross-festival demand for liquidity. Meanwhile, by basically aligning the matured reverse repos with cash flowing back to the banking system after the Spring Festival, the PBC sought a balance of fund supply and demand, which was neither tight nor loose. After the Spring Festival, with comprehensive considerations of changes in market circumstances and expectations at home and abroad as well as with respect to COVID-19 and other factors, the central bank conducted reverse repo operations on a daily basis in the open market, and it managed the intensity and pace of these operations in a flexible manner so as to iron out short-term fluctuations, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and stabilize market expectations. Guiding market rates to move stably around central bank policy rates. On January 17, the rates paid on the 1-year Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) and the 7-day open-market operations both declined by 10 basis points to 2.85 percent and 2.10 percent, respectively, which was conducive to uplifting market confidence and to promoting a decline in overall financing costs. This demonstrated that the monetary policy measures were being taken in a proactive and foresighted manner. In Q1, the PBC guided market rates to stably move around the lowered open market operation rates and the MLF rates, and it realized the interest rate management goals. Money market rates remained stable during the Spring Festival season and at end-March. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q1 2022, the PBC conducted CBS operations on three occasions, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized banks, and in strengthening the credit supply capacities of small and medium-sized banks.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q1 2022, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, the RMB-denominated central bank bill repos market developed further, with the scope of the institutional participants continuously expanding. The regular issuance of central bank bills and the development of the central bank bill repos market in Hong Kong enriched the scope of RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in Hong Kong, which played an active role in promoting the sound development of the offshore RMB money market and bond market and in propelling both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market. II. Conducting Medium-term Lending Facility and Standing Lending Facility operations in a timely manner Conducting MLF operations in a timely manner. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and interest rate guiding functions of medium-term policy rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1.20 trillion of MLF operations in Q1 2022, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.85 percent, 0.1 percentage points lower than that at end-2021. At endMarch, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.95 trillion, RMB400 billion more than that at the beginning of 2022. Further advancing the reforms of electronic SLF operations. The entire process of conducting SLF operations became electronic in an orderly manner, which boosted operational efficiency. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations, strengthen the stability of liquidity in the banking system, and forestall liquidity risks. In Q1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB6.43 billion SLF operations. At end-March, the balance of SLF operations registered RMB1.26 billion. The SLF rate played a role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, and it promoted smooth operation of the money market. At end-March, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.95 percent, 3.10 percent, and 3.45 percent, respectively, with the rates 0.1 percentage points lower those at end-2021. III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions The required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered in an attempt to support the real economy and to promote the steady decline of overall financing costs. The PBC reduced the required reserve ratio by 0.25 percentage points, effective on April 25, 2022 (not applicable to financial institutions that had already implemented a required reserve ratio (RRR) of 5 percent). In order to ramp up support for MSBs as well as agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, urban commercial banks operating businesses within the province of registration and rural commercial banks implementing an RRR of over 5 percent enjoyed an additional RRR cut of 0.25 percentage points. The RRR reduction released about RMB530 billion of long-term funds, and after the RRR cut, the weighted average RRR for financial institutions stood at 8.1 percent. The purposes of the RRR cut were as follows. First, it aimed to optimize the funding structure of financial institutions, expand their sources of long-term stable funding, enhance their capabilities to allocate funds, and ramp up support for the real economy. Second, it aimed to guide financial institutions to make good use of the funds released from the RRR cut to support industries as well as micro, small, and mediumsized enterprises (MSMEs) that were hard hit by COVID-19. Third, the RRR cut lowered the funding costs for financial institutions by approximately RMB6.5 billion per year, which would promote a reduction in overall financing costs through the transmission of financial institutions. The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was lowered for financial institutions, and their foreign exchange allocation capabilities were enhanced. The PBC lowered the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by 1 percentage point, from 9 percent to 8 percent, effective on May 15, 2022, which would release around USD10 billion of foreign exchange liquidity.IV. Further improving the macro prudential management framework The role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) was given full play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In Q1 2022, the PBC further optimized the MPA assessment framework and guided financial institutions to enhance the stability of growth of credit aggregates and to ramp up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector and for green development. Administration on access of financial holding companies (FHCs) proceeded in a prudent and orderly manner. In March 2022, the PBC approved the establishment of China CITIC Financial Holdings (in preparation) and Beijing Financial Holdings Group. For a non-financial enterprise, establishing an FHC serves to effectively isolate the financial and non-financial business, prevent risk contagion, and facilitate wellregulated and sustainable development. Going forward, the PBC will, in accordance with the laws and regulations, proceed with the approval procedures for those FHCs whose applications have been accepted, and it will continue to promote other eligible enterprises to apply for FHC establishments in a prudent and orderly manner. Box 2 Regulating Financial Holding Companies from a Macro Prudential Perspective In recent years, some non-financial firms have entered the financial sector through investments or by establishing new companies. Some of them control various types of financial institutions and have features of financial holding companies (FHCs). Among them, some firms have been playing positive roles in providing financial services, enhancing the capital strength of financial institutions, and serving the real economy. But a small number of firms have controlled and extracted funds from financial institutions, resulting in an interplay of risks between financial and non-financial sectors. The CPC Central Committee and the State Council have reiterated the need to regulate cross-sector financial activities and the integration between industry and finance. In particular, FHCs should be subject to coordinated regulation to address regulatory shortfalls. In September 2020, with the release of the Decisions of the State Council on Implementing Access Management of Financial Holding Companies and the Trial Measures on Regulation of Financial Holding Companies, a general regulatory framework for FHCs was preliminarily established. It has been further improved with the release of detailed rules, such as the Interim Regulations on Filingbased Management of Directors, Supervisors, and Senior Executives of Financial Holding Companies. Given the fact that FHCs are usually large in scale and have diversified business lines, a complex organizational structure, and strong risk spillover effects, it is necessary to regulate them from a macro, holistic and systemic regulatory perspective, which comprises an important part of macro prudential management. By enhancing macro prudential management on FHCs, we can get hold of the overall status of operation and the comprehensive risk profiles of financial holding groups, promoting the wellregulated and sustainable development of FHCs and enhancing their capacity to serve the real economy. Based on the above considerations, efforts should be made to implement regulation of FHCs in the following respects. First, upholding the principle that finance is a franchise industry and ensuring good access management. If a non-financial firm has de facto control of two or more types of financial institutions, and asset scale of the financial institutions that are actually controlled reach a certain threshold, the firm should apply for approval to establish an FHC. The enterprise should place all its financial shares under unified management at the FHC, and all financial activities should be conducted by the corresponding financial institutions affiliated with the FHC, thereby effectively separating industrial and financial activities. Second, upholding the look-through principle to enforce regulation of shareholders and the shareholder structure. FHCs should have a simple and clear ownership structure, in which the actual controllers and ultimate beneficiaries are transparent and identifiable. Major shareholders should have strong capital strength and well-regulated business operations, and the source of funds they invest in the FHC shall be real and legitimate. Third, enforcing consolidated regulation and focusing on the risks of groups, such as conflicts of interest, risk concentration, and risk contagion. FHCs and their affiliated financial institutions should be guided to maintain adequate capital, improve the governance structure at all corporate levels, and enforce the management of related party transactions. Fourth, specifying risk isolation requirements. FHCs should establish a risk isolation mechanism among the major shareholders, the FHC and its affiliated institutions, and among the affiliated institutions, and build a stronger “firewall” to prevent cross-sector, cross-institution, and cross-market risk contagions. Currently, work on access management and regulation of FHCs is making steady progress. In March 2022, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) approved the establishment of China CITIC Financial Holdings Company (in preparation) and the Beijing Financial Holdings Group. In addition, a number of eligible enterprises are applying for becoming FHCs, whereby they can ascertain their business lines and facilitate the separation of financial and non-financial activities. In particular, they shall ensure that the shareholders are eligible, and the organizational structure and relevant management meet the requirements for establishment. Going forward, the PBC will continue to uphold market-oriented and law-based principles, as well as the “Two Unwavering Commitments”. The PBC will speed up theformulation of supplementary rules for FHC regulation, take sound and orderly steps to promote eligible enterprises to submit applications to set up FHCs, proceed with the approval of FHCs in accordance with laws and regulations, and carry out continuous regulation of approved FHCs. The PBC will enhance regulatory cooperation and information sharing with the relevant authorities to promote sound operation of FHCs so as to better serve high-quality development of the real economy and help keep the major economic indicators within a reasonable range. The Notice on the Exclusion of Loans for Government-subsidized Rental Housing from Real Estate Loan Concentration Management was released. The PBC and the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) released the Notice on February 8, 2022, which clarifies that loans for government-subsidized rental housing projects shall be excluded from real estate loan concentration management. Banking institutions were encouraged to scale up support for government-subsidized rental housing in accordance with the laws and regulations, while pursuing sound risk management and commercial sustainability, so as to underpin the construction of a housing support system and the establishment of a housing system with diversified suppliers, multiple supporting channels, and a dual emphasis on both housing purchases and housing rentals. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development, central bank lending for MSBs, and central bank discounts to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and vulnerable spots in the national economy and for coordinated regional development. The PBC continued to leverage the role of central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and as a positive incentive. It contributed to connecting the consolidation of achievements in poverty eradication with rural revitalization. Central bank lending for supporting rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to the current regulations so as to support consolidation of the achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBC promoted coordinated regional development by guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces with slow credit growth to make good use of central bank lending and expand credit supply for vulnerable parts of the economy within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private businesses. More relief and assistance were provided for MSBs as the PBC guided locally incorporated financial institutions to utilize central bank lending for MSBs and to issue loans to MSBs and self-employed businesses heavily hit by mounting commodity prices and COVID-19, so as to reduce their financing costs. At end-March, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB516.1 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.3315 trillion and RMB171.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB624.7 billion. In Q1 2022, the PBC made net withdrawals of Pledged Supplementary Lending (PSLs) in the amount of RMB65.4 billion from development and policy banks, with outstanding PSLs registering RMB2.7363 trillion at end-March. Steadily advancing conversion of the two monetary policy instruments that directly support the real economy to bolster the development of MSBs. According to the decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council, the PBC converted the two instruments that provide direct support to the real economy into market-oriented instruments to strengthen support for MSBs. First, from 2022, the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans was incorporated into the management of central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs. The quota of RMB400 billion central bank lending originally arranged to support inclusive unsecured MSB loans will be rolled over, and locally incorporated banks will be encouraged to issue these loans. Second, the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans has been converted into the instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans. From the beginning of 2022 to end-June 2023, for inclusive MSB loans issued by locally incorporated banks, the PBC will provide funding on a quarterly basis in the amount of 1 percent of the incremental balance of these loans so as to encourage banks to extend inclusive MSB loans. In Q1, the PBC provided RMB4.349 billion of funding to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increase of RMB436.6 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Continue implementing the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal, so as to support the green, low-carbon transition of the economy. Specifically, the CERF supports three major areas of carbon reduction: clean energy, energy conservation and environmental protection, and carbon reduction technology. The special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coal provides support in seven relevant areas, such as mass clean coal production and application of clean combustion technology. The quota of the special central bank lending was increased by RMB100 billion to support coal development and to use and boost the coal reserve capacity. Ensuring effective implementation of these two instruments and encouraging financial institutions to provide credit support for carbon emissions reductions and for the clean and efficient use of coal facilitate the transition to a green and low-carbon economy while ensuring security of the energy supply so as to contribute to the goal of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality in a scientific and orderly way. In Q1, through these two instruments, the PBC provided RMB53 billion and RMB19.8 billion, respectively, to relevant institutions, with a total of RMB72.8 billion. Since implementation of these instruments, the PBC has provided RMB138.6 billion and RMB22.5 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB161.1 billion. Establishing special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation and inclusive elderly care to help build a robust country through sci-tech development and to help address population aging. To implement the decisions made at the State Council’s executive meetings, with the aim of providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives and in line with market-oriented principles, the PBC established two special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation and for inclusive elderly care. The facility for sci-tech innovation supports new- and high-tech enterprises, small and medium-sized enterprises with technical know-how, sophisticated operations, unique products, and innovative capabilities, national model enterprises for technological innovation, and champion enterprises in particular areas of the manufacturing sector. The facility for inclusive elderly care supports eligible institutions providing inclusive elderly care services. A pilot program has been carried out in five provinces including Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Henan, Hebei, and Jiangxi. In April, the PBC, the Ministry of Science and Technology, and the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology jointly issued the Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for Sci-Tech Innovation (Yinfa No.104 [2022]). The PBC and the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) jointly issued the Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for Inclusive Elderly Care (Yinfa No.107 [2022]). Both facilities adopt a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a quarterly basis. Specifically, financial institutions are subject to their own decisionmaking at their own risk, and they can apply for funding support under the special central bank lending facilities after they grant loans to eligible enterprises in relevant industries. For qualified loans, the PBC provides low-cost funding for a certain proportion of the principal through central bank lending facilities. The “reimbursement” proportions of central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and for inclusive elderly care are 60 percent and 100 percent, respectively. The interest rate is 1.75 percent for both. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reforms The quality and efficiency of financial services to MSMEs have been improving. Financial support to stabilize businesses and secure employment was further stepped up, the Project for Enhancing Capacity to Provide Financial Services for MSMEs was further advanced, while the establishment of a long-term mechanism whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism to provide loans to MSMEs was further accelerated, aiming to guide financial institutions to improve their internal resource allocations and policy arrangements and to strengthen employment of sci-tech tools so as to sustainably improve financial services to MSMEs. As of endMarch, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 24.6 percent year on year to RMB20.8 trillion. These loans supported 50.39 million MSBs, up 42.9 percent year on year. The interest rate on new inclusive loans to MSBs posted 4.93 percent in March, dropping by 17 basis points from December 2021. In February, the PBC, NDRC, and other related departments jointly released the Policies on Promoting the Recovery and Development of Industries with Difficulties in the Services Sector, which provide inclusive relief and assistance measures to businesses with difficulties in the services sector and increase preferential support for five industries in extreme difficulties, including catering, retail, tourism, transportation, and civil aviation. Financial services for rural revitalization were further promoted. The PBC conscientiously implemented the decisions and arrangements for promoting the rural revitalization strategy on all fronts and continuously enhanced the policy system of financial support for rural revitalization. The Opinions on Efforts to Ensure Key Financial Support for Promoting Rural Revitalization on All Fronts in the Year 2022 were issued, aiming to guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, enhance financial resource inputs to vital agricultural products, rural industries, rural construction, and other key areas, and promote the steady growth of agro-related loan issuances. The PBC continued to promote financial support to consolidate and expand the achievements of poverty eradication through efforts to guide financial institutions to provide preferential financial resources for regions that had been lifted out of poverty, such as key counties that receive assistance to pursue rural revitalization so as to maintain a stable pace of loan issuances to regions and populations that had shaken off poverty. As of end-March 2022, outstanding agro-related loans nationwide increased 12.2 percent year on year to RMB45.63 trillion. In particular, outstanding rural household loans increased by 12.9 percent year on year to RMB14.05 trillion. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform were continuously unleashed, while the regulations over deposit interest rates were improved, further bringing down actual loan rates. First, the LPR reform was further promoted, and the guiding role of the LPR was brought into play. As a result, actual corporate loan rates remained stable with a slight decline, and corporate financing costs were lowered significantly. Second, the regulations over deposit rates were further strengthened, with deposit rate pricing behavior for agreement deposits and other deposit products further regulated. In February 2022, the PBC guided the Self-regulatory Mechanism for Market Rate Pricing to release the Initiatives on Reinforcing Self-regulatory Management for Agreement Deposits, urging and guiding financial institutions to conduct agreement deposit businesses in compliance with the laws and regulations. In April, the deposit rate market-oriented adjustment mechanism was improved, further promoting the pricing of deposit rates in a more market-oriented manner. Third, conversion of the financial market benchmark rate from the LIBOR in domestic markets was actively promoted. From January 1, 2022, some of the LIBOR businesses stopped quotations or lost their representative nature as scheduled. In Q1, major domestic banks have already arranged conversion of the pricing benchmark for all businesses affected by the LIBOR expiration, while most of the new foreign-currency-denominated floating rate businesses in the domestic market have switched their benchmark from the LIBOR to other alternative benchmark rates. Box 3 Establishing a Market-oriented Adjustment Mechanism for Deposit Interest Rates In October 2015, the PBC removed administrative control over deposit interest rates, and members of the Interest Rate Self-regulatory Mechanism (IRSRM) could autonomously set deposit rates within the self-regulatory ceiling of deposit interest rates. In June 2021, the PBC guided the IRSRM to optimize the formation mechanism of the self-regulatory ceiling of deposit interest rates, shifting from multiplying the benchmark deposit rates by a designated multiplier to adding basis points to the benchmark interest rates. This move has not only protected the autonomy of banks in pricing their deposit rates but also has been conducive to lowering the medium and long-term deposit interest rates, improving the maturity structure of time deposits, promoting orderly market competition, as well as enhancing the sustainability of the financial sector’s support to the real economy. In March 2022, the weighted average interest rate for new time deposits stood at 2.37 percent, decreasing 0.08 percentage points year on year and 0.12 percentage points from May 2021 before the optimization. In particular, the interest rates for medium to long-term time deposits enjoyed a much larger decrease, with two-year, three-year, and five-year time deposit rates falling by 0.18, 0.43, and 0.45 percentage points from May 2021, respectively. Due to the fierce competitions in the deposit market, many banks in practice set their time deposit rates and certificate deposit (CD) rates close to the self-regulatory ceiling. This, to some extent, has hampered the effective transmission of market interest rates, making it very difficult for deposit rates to follow the changes in market rates. In April 2022, the PBC guided the IRSRM to establish a market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates, whereby member banks of the IRSRM can adjust their deposit rates according to the bond market rates (represented by the 10-year government bond yield) and the loan market rates (represented by the 1-year LPR). Establishment of this new mechanism will help banks closely follow changes in market rates and enhance their market-based pricing ability for deposit rates, while preserving a benign competition order in the deposit market. The key to setting up the market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit rates is to promote the market-based nature of deposit rate pricing, with flexible guidance to banks. Banks can autonomously determine the actual adjustment ranges to their deposit rates, according to their own circumstances and changes in market rates. For those financial institutions with timely and highly-efficient market-oriented adjustments for deposit rates, the PBC will offer appropriate incentive measures. After establishment of the new mechanism, the deposit rates of banks are priced in a more market-oriented manner, which, against the current backdrop of overall falling market rates, can help the banks maintain stable liability costs and thus further bring down actual loan rates. In practice, the ICBC, ABC, BOC, CCB, BCM, PSBC, and most of the joint stock banks, in late April had already lowered the rates for time deposits and CDs with maturities of over 1 year, and some locally-incorporated financial institutions also made corresponding adjustments. According to the latest survey data, in the last week of April (April 25 to May 1), the weighted average interest rate for new time deposits posted 2.37 percent, 10 basis points lower than that in the previous week. Going forward, the PBC will continue to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform, improve the formation and transmission mechanism for market-oriented interest rates, optimize the central bank policy rate system, strengthen regulations over deposit rates, strive to stabilize the liability costs of banks, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus bring down overall corporate financing costs . VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q1 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the USD were 6.3014 and 6.3800, respectively. During the 58 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 32 days and depreciated on 26 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 0.6 percent (394 bps) and 0.6 percent (364 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate appreciated against other major international currencies. At end-March, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen appreciated 0.4 percent, 1.9 percent, 3.2 percent, and 6.6 percent, respectively, from end-2021. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism that commenced in 2005 to end-March 2022, the RMB appreciated by a cumulative total of 30.4 percent, 41.4 percent, and 40.6 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of microeconomic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and investment. As of end-March, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and the foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB60.375 billion and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD496 million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions New achievements were made to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with total financial risks decreasing. Addressing the risks of high-risk groups was steadily advanced, and financial risks in key regions and areas were orderly mitigated. The reduction of high-risk institutions was continuously advanced, with the number decreasing notably. The PBC conducted stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions. The central bank rating of financial institutions in Q4 2021 was completed, with 4,398 banking financial institutions being rated throughout the nation. The rating results indicate that most institutions fell within the safety boundary (level 1 to level 7), and high-risk institutions (level 8 to D) dropped successively for six quarters, decreasing by more than half from the peak level. As of end-2021, there were no highrisk institutions in 11 provinces (municipalities or autonomous regions). A long-term mechanism to safeguard financial stability was established. To implement the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on forestalling and defusing financial risks and on improving the rule of law in the financial sector, and to establish a long-term mechanism to safeguard financial stability, the PBC drafted the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Financial Stability (Exposure Draft), which solicited public opinions in April. Box 4 Accelerating Legislation on Financial Stability In recent years, under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the Financial Stability Development Committee (FSDC) under the State Council has coordinated and directed work at the forefront, and government departments and local authorities have made concerted efforts in fighting the tough battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks and secured significant achievements. With long-accumulated risks effectively resolved, financial risks have been contained and on the whole have remained under control, thus reinforcing the foundation for financial stability and boosting the overall stable and sound development of the financial sector. At present, China is striding toward its second centenary goal. Based on the “two overall situations”, it is necessary to plan ahead by drafting the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Financial Stability (Exposure Draft), which began soliciting public opinions from April 6. The legislation on financial stability is essential and bears great significance. First, it implements the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on forestalling and defusing financial risks and on improving the rule of law in the financial sector, thus effectively safeguarding China’s economic and financial safety and social stability. Second, it summarizes experiences and practices proved effective in the tough battle against major financial risks and it establishes a long-term mechanism for safeguarding financial stability. Third, it establishes a legal system concerning financial stability with a holistic design and cross-departmental and cross-sectoral coordination, harmonizes scattered articles and principles, and sets regulatory standards for some important issues. The Law on Financial Stability (Exposure Draft) has 48 articles in six chapters, which are General Provisions, Financial Risk Prevention, Financial Risk Defusing, Financial Risk Resolution, Legal Liabilities, and Supplementary Provisions. The following are the priorities:First, improving the working mechanism for financial stability. Upholding the Party’s centralized and unified leadership, the mechanism for coordinating national financial stability and reform (the FSDC under the State Council) coordinates financial stability and reform and development, takes the lead in forestalling, defusing, and addressing major financial risks, and reports and reviews major issues according to procedures. Related financial regulatory departments and local authorities follow the division of work and the requirements of the FSDC and fulfill their duties on financial supervision and on forestalling, defusing and addressing financial risks. The Deposit Insurance Fund and industry protection funds perform their duties in monitoring and addressing risks to forge a bigger synergy to safeguard financial stability. Second, ensuring that related parties fulfill their responsibilities in forestalling, defusing. and addressing financial risks. Ensure that financial institutions, their main shareholders, and the actual controllers fulfill their primary responsibilities. Strengthen prudential management obligations of financial institutions, and intensify market access and regulatory requirements for the main shareholders and the actual controllers. Ensure that local governments fulfill their responsibilities within their jurisdictions to maintain financial stability and promptly take proactive actions to defuse regional financial risks. Ensure that financial regulatory departments tighten regulation and fulfill their responsibilities for risk prevention and control in the respective industries and areas by rigorously preventing, correcting, and addressing risks at an early stage. The PBC will act as the lender of last resort to ensure that no systemic financial risks arise. Third, specifying the arrangements of funds for addressing risks, which are fair and well-regulated, and featuring matched rights, responsibilities, and interests. The sequence of funds usage for resolving financial risks is outlined. Bail-outs are provided after the financial institutions' bail-in arrangements to reduce reliance on public funds. Failed institutions should conduct active bail-ins as the main shareholders and the actual controllers commit themselves to replenishing capital in line with the recovery and resolution plan or regulatory commitments, and the shareholders and actual controllers accountable for financial risks should fulfill their bail-in obligations in accordance with the law. Meanwhile, market-oriented funds are mobilized and channeled to the merger and restructuring of failed institutions, and the Deposit Insurance Fund and industry protection funds provide funding in accordance with the law. Local public resources are legally employed when financial risks endanger regional stability, and such risks are difficult to defuse after the exhaustion of marketoriented measures and the strict implementation of retrieving illegal gains and loss. When major financial risks that put financial stability in jeopardy, the Financial Stability Protection Fund provides funding support in line with the requirements to guard against moral hazards and to strictly enforce market discipline.Fourth, establishing the Financial Stability Protection Fund. The Fund is positioned to provide back-up funds to address China’s major financial risks that bear systemic significance. The Fund, coordinated and managed by the FSDC under the State Council, will be financed by financial institutions and financial infrastructure operators. It will also encompass funds from other sources as stipulated by the State Council. It is specified that the State Council will stipulate measures for the fundraising, management, and use of the Fund. The Fund, along with the Deposit Insurance Fund and industry protection funds comprise a “two-tier” system, and their coordination will buttress China’s financial safety net. Fifth, establishing a market- and law-based mechanism to resolve risks. Based on the actual resolution needs, a variety of measures are set with reference to international experience. These measures include but not limited to the execution of the right of operation and management, the transfer of assets and liabilities, the establishment of bridge banks and special purpose vehicles (SPVs), the suspension of close-out netting, the change of persons liable and claw-back of remunerations, the implementation of debt write-downs, equity write-downs, and debt-for-equity swaps, the suspension of overseas remittances and the repatriation of overseas assets, and the requirement to solicit support from parent groups by systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). Meanwhile, the sequence of equity write-downs and debt write-downs is specified, and in principle the gains of creditors and interest-related parties through risk resolution will not be lower than the gains through bankruptcy liquidation. Moreover, supporting arrangements for resolution are linked with the judicial process. Sixth, those who violate the laws and rules will be held accountable. It is specified that those who violate laws and regulations that lead to the outbreak and spread of financial risks will be held accountable in accordance with the law. It sets out the punishment for activities in violation of the laws and regulations amid the rise and resolution of financial risks by financial institutions, their major shareholders, and their actual controllers. Public officials who fail to perform their duties will be held accountable in accordance with the law. If they commit crimes, they will be held criminally responsible. In the next step, the PBC will work with the relevant authorities to fully incorporate public feedback into the revision of the draft law, and it will cooperate with the legislature on subsequent work in accordance with legislative procedures so as to release the Law on Financial Stability in due course. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scope, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthened risk prevention and control. X. Deepening reform of foreign exchange arrangements The coverage and quality of policies to facilitate trade-related foreign exchange payments and receipts of quality enterprises were enhanced. The policies were steadily expanded to cover more firms. These policies and measures were improved to expand the business scope and to enhance the filing requirements of banks and firms. During the first three months of 2022, six regions were newly added for such firms to conduct facilitated foreign exchange payments and receipts. By end-March, these facilitation policies were expanded to cover 32 regions, 146 banks, and 1,828 firms. The solid implementation of a pilot high-level opening up was advanced in key regions. Implementation of pilot policies on a high-level opening up of cross-border trade and investment was closely monitored in an attempt to streamline procedures in business operations, to lower the settlement costs of foreign exchange funds, and to boost the turnover of capital. By end-March 2022, 19 pilot banks had filed relevant materials in four regions, including Lin-gang Special Area of China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone, benefiting the pilot current account business in manufacturing, energy and chemical, high-tech industries and other industries. The overseas lending business by domestic banks was supported and regulated. In January 2022, the PBC and the SAFE released the Notice on the Overseas Lending Business by Banking Institutions (Yinfa No.27[2022]) to boost the coordinated management of banks’ overseas loans with cross-border guarantees and outbound direct investments. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In Q1 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates fluctuated around the interest rates of open market operations, featuring an overall downward movement and active market transactions. Bond issuances increased with a surge in local government bonds. The bond market witnessed active transactions, stable rates, and expanded term spreads. The stock market index went down, with increased turnover and decreased funds raised.I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates generally declined with active market transactions. In March 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 2.07 percent, and the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.08 percent, 5 basis points higher and 1 basis point lower than those in December 2021, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.96 percent, 12 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos in the interbank market. At end-March, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.01 percent and 2.20 percent, respectively, down 12 and 7 basis points from end-2021, respectively. Market transactions were active. In Q1 2022, the volume of bond repos trading on the interbank market reached RMB287.9 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB4.8 trillion, up 29 percent year on year. The volume of cumulative trading in interbank lending registered RMB30.4 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB506.7 billion and a year-on-year increase of 4.4 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 85.4 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2 percentage points year on year, and overnight lending constituted 87.7 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, down 1.3 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 27.3 percent year on year to RMB96.6 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In Q1 2022, about 6,866 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB5.4 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB47.9 trillion. At end-March, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.7 trillion. The weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.40 percent, 2 basis points lower than that of the 3-month Shibor. In Q1 2022, about 17,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB4.5 trillion, an increase of RMB700 billion year on year. Interest rate swap transactions witnessed a contraction. In Q1 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 55,000 transactions, decreasing 27.4 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB4.4 trillion, a decrease of 18.3 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB2.8 trillion, accounting for 64.4 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 87.8 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q1 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 302 transactions, with RMB50.36 billion of the notional principal, up 4.1 percent and 74.5 percent year on year, respectively. The interest rate option business developed steadily. The LPR option business was officially launched on the interbank market in March 2020 and the fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29, 2021. In Q1 2022, a total of 141 interest rate option transactions were concluded, totaling RMB19.994 billion, and all were interest rate cap/floor option transactions anchored to the LPR. 2. Rates of bonds were generally stable, while bond issuances expanded with active trading of spot bonds Coupon rates of bonds declined. In March 2022, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.81 percent, 1 basis point lower than that in December 2021. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 2.99 percent, 3 basis points lower than the rate in December 2021. There was one 1-year short-term financing bill (bond rating A-1, enterprises rating AAA) issued in March 2022, with a coupon rate of 2.06 percent, 101 basis points lower than the average rate in December 2021.Government securities yields went up before going down, with term spreads expanding. At end-March 2022, yields on 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year government securities decreased by 11 basis points, 4 basis points, and 4 basis points to 2.13 percent, 2.42 percent, and 2.57 percent from end-2021, respectively; yields on 7-year and 10-year government securities increased by 3 basis points and 1 basis point to 2.82 percent and 2.79 percent, respectively, from end-2021. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 66 basis points, expanding 13 basis points from end-2021. Bond issuances increased. In Q1 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 6.1 percent, or RMB869.6 billion, year on year to RMB15.0 trillion, driven mostly by surges in government bonds and debt-financing instruments issued by nonfinancial institutions. At end-March 2022, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB137.8 trillion, representing an increase of 14.8 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed rapid growth. In Q1 2022, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB69.7 trillion, registering an increase of 35.8 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank market was RMB61.7 trillion, representing an increase of 33.9 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB8 trillion, an increase of 51.8 percent year on year. 3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market were basically stableThe bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In Q1 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB7.0 trillion, rising 13.8 percent year on year. At endQ1, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB15.8 trillion, increasing by 11.8 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew steadily, with the outstanding at the end of March increasing by RMB774.6 billion compared to the beginning of 2022. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 67.8 percent was issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In Q1 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB13.4 trillion, growing 18.2 percent year on year. At end-March, the balance of bill financing was RMB10.7 trillion, up 35.3 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.3 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 0.9 percentage points year on year. In Q1 2022, the interest rates for bill financing first increased and then decreased, remaining generally stable. 4. Stock indices went down with the amount of funds raised decreasing, while turnover expanded year on year The stock indices went down. At end-March 2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,252 points, decreasing by 10.6 percent from end-2021. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 12,118 points, decreasing by 18.4 percent from end-2021. In Q1 2022, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB58.5 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB1 trillion, representing an increase of 6.5 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets decreased year on year. In Q1, a cumulative fund of RMB333.7 billion was raised, decreasing by 1.9 percent year on year. 5. Premium income decreased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down In Q1 2022, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB1.8 trillion, down 1 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.2 percentage points from end-2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB451.3 billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 14.2 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 4.8 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went up by 21.3 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-Q1 2022, total assets in the insurance sector increased 5.8 percent year on year to RMB25.7 trillion, a deceleration of 1 percentage point from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 2.7 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 4 percent year on year. 6. Turnover of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions witnessed rapid growth In Q1 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD1.9 trillion, a decrease of 17.7 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD5.4 trillion, an increase of 19.9 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD3.4 trillion, accounting for 62.8 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD27.4 billion, rising 6.3 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD380 billion, increasing by 21.5 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 61.9 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, and prices went up At end-March 2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,942.15 per ounce, representing growth of 8.3 percent from end-2021. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB394.14 per gram, increasing by 5.4 percent from end-2021. In Q1 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 9,579.04 tons, representing growth of 2.6 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB3.69 trillion, representing growth of 5.2 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market Institutional arrangements for bond lending were improved. In February 2022, the PBC released the Measures for the Administration of Bond Lending in the Interbank Bond Market (Announcement No.1 [2022] of the PBC). The Measures improve the institutional arrangements for bond lending in the interbank bond market by unifying the content of bond lending agreements, launching central bond lending, and improving the mechanism for default resolution. Requirements on risk prevention are also clarified in the Measures, involving such aspects as the reporting of high-value lending, information disclosures, risk monitoring, and self-regulation, aiming to protect the legitimate rights and interests of market participants, increase bond market liquidity, and enable the better functioning and sound development of the financial market. 2. Reform and institutional arrangements in the securities market The rule of law was strengthened in the capital market. In January 2022, the Supreme People’s Court released the Several Provisions of the Supreme People's Court on the Trial of Civil Cases for Damages for the Tort of Misrepresentation in the Securities Market, which raise the costs for unlawful acts in the capital market, ensure investors’ right to remedy, and provide a solid legal foundation for all market participants to perform their respective duties. In the same month, the CSRC released the Provisions on the Implementation of the Rules for the Undertakings Made by Parties to Securities and Futures Administrative Law Enforcement. The Provisions give full play to the merits of the rules for the undertakings made by the administrative law enforcement parties, provide investors with a new channel to get timely and effective remedies, and improve the quality and efficiency of administrative law enforcement. The quality of information disclosures in the capital market was improved. In January 2021, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on Improving the Quality of Information Disclosures in Prospectuses under the Registration System, which urges issuers and agencies to perform their duties by making the prospectuses more readable, investment decisions more relevant, and information disclosures more targeted. The capital market was further opened up. In February 2022, the CSRC released the Provisions on the Supervision and Administration of Depository Receipts under the Stock Connect Scheme between Domestic and Overseas Stock Exchanges. The Provisions expand the channels for two-way financing, promote the global distribution of elements, and improve the competitiveness of China’s capital market and its capability to serve the real economy. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The related-party transactions of insurance institutions were regulated. In January 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Related-Party Transactions of Banking and Insurance Institutions, which introduce requirements on the number and scale of related-party transactions. Following the principle of substance over form and penetrating regulation, they improve the recognition of related parties and their transactions, focusing particularly on the risks of tunneling that directs profits to shareholders and their related parties. The Rules also require institutions to shoulder primary responsibility for managing related-party transactions and specify the punishment of institutions and their directors, supervisors, and senior executives for violations. The underwriting and claim payments of agricultural insurance were regulated. In February 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Underwriting and Claim Payments of Agriculture Insurance. Based on the Interim Rules on Underwriting and Claim Payments of Agriculture Insurance and the experience gained in the reform, and the development and regulatory practice of agricultural insurance in recent years, the newly-introduced Rules center more on serving agriculture, rural areas, and rural residents, and include forest insurance as an object of regulation. They also further clarify the content and requirements of insuring information and stipulate different inspection targets of the subject-matter insured according to different types of insurance. Furthermore, the Rules cover such aspects as unifying time limits for loss assessments, stressing the prohibition of swindling premium subsidies, and highlighting insurance technology. The regulatory arrangements of reserves of the non-life insurance business were improved. In March 2022, the CBIRC released the Implementation Measures of the Rules on Reserves of the Non-life Insurance Business of Insurance Companies (Nos.1– 7). Targeting new cases and problems such as the discretionary adjustments of branches’ reserves and adjusting profits through reserves in some insurance companies, the Measures make clear the principles and methodology of reserve assessments and strengthen the institutional weak links by regulating the treatment of risk margins and discounting in reserve assessments, the reserve management of insurance company branches, and the retrospective analysis of reserves. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments The global economy slowed down in the first quarter due to, among others, the resurgence of COVID-19, growing geopolitical tensions, and faster tightening of monetary policy in the major advanced economies. Overseas inflationary pressures continued to rise, and the price of energy, metals, and agricultural products surged. Volatility has increased in global financial markets, and the prospects for a global economic recovery have become increasingly complex and uncertain. 1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies Downward pressures on global growth have emerged. COVID-19 resurged sharply earlier this year, with the global daily confirmed cases approaching 4 million once in January. Though the number of confirmed cases dropped notably in March and April, the future path of COVID-19 still remains uncertain. In February, escalation of geopolitical tensions put a further drag on the global economic recovery. In March, the consumer confidence index in the US, the euro area, and Japan fell by 11.2, 10.3, and 6.3 percentage points, respectively, from December 2021. The manufacturing purchasing managers’ index (PMI) dropped from 58.8, 58.0, and 54.3 in December 2021 to 57.1, 56.5, and 54.1. In April, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank revised downward their global growth forecasts for this year, both expressing concerns about the economic slowdown. The recovery of labor supply was sluggish in the advanced economies, and inflation continued to rise. Job vacancies in the US hit 11.266 million in February, exceeding 10 million for eight consecutive months. The average hourly wage in the US increased by 5.6 percent year on year in March, while the average weekly wage in the UK went up by 5.4 percent year on year in February, both way higher than the less than 3 percent average annual growth in the three years prior to the outbreak of COVID-19. The wage-price spiral was more pronounced in the advanced economies, which persistently pushed up inflation. In March, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) was up by 8.5 percent in the US and by 7.0 percent in the UK compared with the previous year, reaching a 40-year and 30-year high, respectively. In April, the Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the euro area rose by 7.5 percent over the prior year, a new record high since the statistics became available. Inflation also continued in some emerging economies. In March, the IPCA in Brazil and the CPI in India were up by 11.3 percent and 7.0 percent year on year, respectively. Volatility increased in global financial markets. First, geopolitical conflicts have sent the price of energy, metals, and other commodities on a roller-coaster ride. In the first quarter, the price of Brent crude oil was once close to USD140 per barrel, a new record high since 2008, and it finished the quarter by jumping 36 percent. Given the sharp swings in the price of nickel, the London Metal Exchange on one occasion suspended the trading of nickel futures and changed the trading rules. Second, major stock indices declined across the board. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, the STOXX50, and the Nikkei 225 dropped 4.6 percent, 9.2 percent, and 3.4 percent, respectively, in the first quarter, reflecting heightened volatility. Third, the yield on government bonds rose sharply as the major advanced economies quickened the pace of their monetary policy tightening. In the first quarter, the yields on 10-year government bonds in the US, Germany, and the UK went up by 60 to 80 basis points (bps). The yield on 10-year US Treasuries rose to 2.3 percent at the end of March, and hit 3.1 percent on May 6, an all- time high since November 2018.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The major advanced economies quickened their pace of monetary policy tightening. The Federal Reserve (Fed) hiked the federal funds rate by 25 bps in March and by 50 bps in May to a target range of 0.75–1 percent, kicking off a new cycle of rate hikes since December 2018. In its March dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2022 was 1.75–2 percent, which means a total hike of 175 bps this year. Seven of the 16 members argued for bigger rate increases. In addition, the Fed finished asset purchases in March and announced during the Federal Open Market Committee meeting in May that it would begin reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities on June 1 initially by USD30 billion and USD17.5 billion per month, respectively, which would then increase to USD60 billion and USD35 billion after three months, respectively. The European Central Bank kept its key policy rates unchanged. It discontinued net purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase program at the end of March and decided to finish the asset purchase program earlier. Monthly net purchases stood at EUR40 billion, EUR30 billion, and EUR20 billion respectively in the second quarter, smaller than the original plan of EUR40 billion for each month. It may end net purchases in the third quarter. After starting to raise rates last December, the Bank of England (BOE) raised the Bank Rate in February, March, and May of this year, each by 25 bps to 1.0 percent. When it met in February, the BOE’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) voted unanimously to begin reducing the Bank’s balance sheet. The MPC announced in May that it would consider beginning the process of selling UK government bonds. The Bank of Japan maintained a loose monetary policy. Among the other central banks, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Bank of Korea all raised rates on one occasion in the first quarter, each by 25 bps, and hiked rates on one occasion in April again by 50 bps, 50 bps, and 25 bps respectively. Several emerging economies continued to raise interest rates. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the risk of capital outflows, some emerging economies continued with rate hikes. In the first quarter, the central banks of Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa increased their rates twice by a total of 250 bps, 100 bps, and 50 bps, respectively, while the central banks of India, Indonesia, and Turkey kept their benchmark rates unchanged. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention Rising geopolitical tensions are weighing down on the global economic recovery. Escalating geopolitical tensions have led to higher commodity prices, such as energy and metals. Growing trade and supply chain disruptions may further push up global inflation and derail the economic recovery, adding more uncertainties to the global economy whose recovery has already been uneven and insufficient. They have also triggered both supply and demand shocks, dampened the momentum for recovery, and prolonged the high inflation in overseas markets. Financial market volatility may also be amplified substantially. The implications of a faster monetary policy tightening in the major advanced economies are emerging. Against the backdrop of a faster monetary policy shift in the major advanced economies since 2022, volatility has increased sharply in global equity, bonds, and foreign exchange markets. Policy spillovers have been felt, as cross-border capital flows are becoming more unstable. However, the tightening of monetary policy in the advanced economies has just started. How it will evolve down the road and the implications thereof merit close attention. The global recovery remains highly diverse, with the developing countries facing challenges. On the one hand, supply strains in raw materials and basic agricultural products may deal a systematic blow to global food and energy security. In particular, import-dependent developing countries face bigger pressures. On the other hand, limited capacity for COVID-19 prevention, coupled with the slower economic recovery, huge debt overhang, and tighter global liquidity will put the debt-servicing capacity of the developing countries to a test. Nor should cross-border capital flows, financial market adjustments, and other financial security issues be neglected. According to the IMF, half of the low-income countries are in or at a high risk of debt distress. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In Q1 2022, faced with multiple tests brought about by the increasingly complex and severe international environment and the frequent occurrences of COVID-19 domestically, China’s economy continued to recover steadily, and the quality of development continued to improve. The national economy got off to a generally steady start. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in Q1 2022 grew by 4.8 percent year on year to RMB27.0178 trillion on a comparable basis, up 0.8 percentage points from Q4 2021. 1. Consumption and investments were stable, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth The increase in residents’ income kept pace with economic growth, and consumption maintained growth. In Q1, China’s per capita disposable income reached RMB10345, increasing by 6.3 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 5.1 percent in real terms. The structure of income distribution continuously improved, and the per capita income gap between urban and rural residents narrowed. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q1, 23.7 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” down 1 percentage point from Q4 2021 and up 1.4 percentage points year on year, respectively. In Q1, total retail sales of consumer goods grew by 3.3 percent year on year. Investments grew steadily with an improved structure. In Q1, total fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households) increased by 9.3 percent year on year. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 15.6 percent, 6.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure and real estate development increased by 8.5 percent and 0.7 percent year on year, respectively, both lower than the growth of total investments. In terms of industries, investments in the high-tech industry grew by 27.0 percent year on year, 17.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in health and education grew by 23.8 percent and 17.2 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports recorded rapid growth. In Q1, imports and exports of goods grew by 10.7 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 13.4 percent year on year and imports grew by 7.5 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods posting RMB1.0369 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share of imports and exports under general trade increasing by 1.8 percentage points year on year. Exports of machinery and electronics and high-tech products increased by 9.8 percent and 10.6 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 58.4 percent and 29.2 percent of total exports, respectively. Our trading partners are becoming more diversified. Imports and exports to the countries along the Belt and Road and the RCEP (Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership) trading partners grew by 16.7 percent and 6.9 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In Q1, actually utilized FDI increased by 25.6 percent year on year to RMB379.87 billion (equivalent to USD59.09 billion), growing by 31.7 percent year on year (excluding investments in banking, securities, and the insurance industry). In terms of sectors, FDI in the high-tech industry and the services industry grew rapidly. In Q1 2021, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 52.9 percent year on year. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 57.8 percent year on year and actually utilized FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 35.7 percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the services industry grew by 17.1 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production made stable progress, industrial production grew rapidly, and the service industry continued to recover In Q1, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in the national economy grew by 6.0 percent, 5.8 percent, and 4.0 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 4.1 percent, 39.3 percent, and 56.6 percent of GDP, respectively. Agricultural production was stable, and animal husbandry grew steadily. Preparations for spring ploughing were carried out smoothly and orderly, the intended sowing area of wheat and rice was generally stable, and the intended sowing area of soybeans increased significantly. Annual grain output has been over 650 million tons for seven successive years, with sufficient total grain supply and abundant inventory. Hogs available for slaughter continued to grow and the production of beef and lamb grew steadily. In Q1, the value-added of agriculture increased by 4.8 percent year on year and hogs available for slaughter increased by 14.1 percent year on year. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 8.8 percent year on year. Industrial production grew rapidly, and the high-tech manufacturing sector continued to play a leading role. In Q1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 6.5 percent year on year. Specifically, the valueadded of the mining sector increased by 10.7 percent year on year. The manufacturing sector increased by 6.2 percent year on year. The electricity, heat, gas and water production, and supply sectors increased by 6.1 percent year on year. The industrial structure was continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector increased by 14.2 percent and 8.1 percent year on year, which were 7.7 percentage points and 1.6 percentage points higher, respectively, than that of the IEDS. New energy cars, solar cells, and industrial robots grew by 140.8 percent, 24.3 percent, and 10.2 percent year on year, respectively. The profits of industrial enterprises increased steadily. In Q1, total profits of the IEDS increased by 8.5 percent year on year. Growth in the service industry continued to recover. In Q1, the value-added of the service industry grew by 4.0 percent year on year. The Index of Service Production (ISP) increased by 2.5 percent year on year. Affected notably by the recent COVID-19 outbreaks, shopping malls, restaurants, and entertainment places in some areas closed down. (The recent COVID-19 outbreaks had a major impact on contact-based consumption, with shopping malls, restaurants, and entertainment venues closed in some areas.) In March, the retail sales of goods decreased by 2.1 percent year on year, and catering revenue decreased by 16.4 percent year on year. At the same time, due to poor logistics transportation and passenger transport running at a low level, the volume of business freight decreased by 1.9 percent and passenger flows decreased by 43.5 percent year on year in March. The growth of a modern service industry attained a good momentum, and telecommunications, radio and television and satellite transmission services, monetary and financial services and the insurance industry were still within a prosperous range. In Q1, the value-added of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services and the financial industry grew by 10.8 percent and 5.1 percent year on year, respectively. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and the increase in producer prices receded from the previous high level Consumer prices increased moderately. In Q1, the CPI increased by 1.1 percent year on year. Specifically, the CPI in January and February increased by 0.9 percent year on year and rose by 1.5 percent year on year in March. The increase in international energy prices accelerated the rise in domestic fuel prices, and non-food prices increased by 2.1 percent year on year. Driven by declines in the price of pork, food prices decreased by 3.1 percent year on year. The year-on-year increase of producer prices receded from the previous high level. In Q1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 8.7 percent. Specifically, the growth rate of the PPI in January, February, and March registered 9.1 percent, 8.8 percent, and 8.3 percent, respectively, representing a downward trend. Policies aiming to ensure stable supplies and prices continued taking effect. The price increases in the coal sector and the steel sector declined slightly from the previous level. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by a cumulative 11.3 percent year on year, accelerating by 0.3 percentage points from 2021. 4. Fiscal revenue rose steadily, and expenditures accelerated In Q1, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB6203.71 billion, increasing by 8.6 percent year on year. Specifically, tax revenue amounted to RMB5245.16 billion, up 7.7 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue registered RMB958.55 billion, up 14.2 percent year on year. Among the main taxes, the domestic value-added tax increased by 3.6 percent year on year. Growth slowed down due to the continuation of tax deferrals for small and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises (SMEs). (Among the main taxes, due to the continuation of tax deferrals for manufacturing SMEs, growth of the domestic value-added tax slowed to 3.6 percent year on year.) The domestic consumption tax, business income tax, and personal income tax went up by 15.8 percent, 9.8 percent, and 16.5 percent year on year, respectively. In Q1, expenditures in the national general budget posted RMB6358.68 billion, increasing by 8.3 percent and an acceleration of 2.1 percentage points from the same period of the previous year. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures related to disaster prevention and control, and emergency management, science and technology, and transportation grew quickly, registering year-on-year growth of 35.4 percent, 22.4 percent, and 10.9 percent, respectively. People’s livelihood and other key areas were supported effectively. Expenditures on education, agriculture/forestry/water resource projects, social security and employment, and public health increased by 8.5 percent, 8.4 percent, 6.8 percent, and 6.2 percent, respectively. 5. The employment situation remained generally stable New employment in the urban areas expanded and the surveyed unemployment rate increased slightly. In Q1, 2.85 million people were newly employed, and the surveyed unemployment rate averaged 5.5 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year. Specifically, the average surveyed unemployment rate among the main labor group between the ages of 25 and 59 was 4.9 percent, and the average unemployment rate among the population with local household registrations was 5.5 percent, both unchanged from 2021. Under the impact of COVID-19, several labor groups faced increasing employment pressures. In March, the unemployment rate among the migrant population with agricultural household registrations increased to 5.9 percent, higher than the urban unemployment rate for two consecutive months. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments in China. According to preliminary statistics, in Q1 2022, China’s current account surplus registered USD89.5 billion, accounting for 2.1 percent of GDP, continuously staying within a reasonable range. Specifically, according to the balance of payments statistics, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD145 billion, an increase of 18 percent year on year, whereas trade in services recorded a deficit of USD18.2 billion, down 30 percent year on year. A basic equilibrium was maintained in cross-border capital flows. Specifically, direct investments recorded a surplus of USD65 billion. At end-Q1 2022, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.188 trillion, down USD62.2 billion from that at end-Q2021, mainly due to the depreciation of non-US currency against the US dollar, and the decline in global asset prices. The risks of foreign debt were generally controllable. By the end of 2021, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.7466 trillion, and medium- and longterm foreign debt accounted for 47 percent of all foreign debt. The Debt to GDP Ratio (the ratio of the total outstanding foreign debt to current GDP) was 15.5 percent. The Debt to Export Ratio (the ratio of total outstanding foreign debt to exports for the current year) was 77.3 percent. The Debt Service Ratio (the ratio of foreign debt service, including principal and interest payments due, to exports for the current year) was 5.9 percent. The ratio of short-term debt to foreign exchange reserves was 44.5 percent. All of the ratios were under the internationally recognized safe level. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In March 2022, among 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built residential housing prices increased by 0.7 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.3 percentage points from end-2021. Second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 0.9 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.9 percentage points from end-2021. In Q1 2022, total floor area of sold units decreased by 13.8 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 22.7 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development grew by 0.7 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 0.7 percent year on year, accounting for 74.8 percent of total investments in real estate development. At end-March 2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 6 percent year on year to RMB53.2 trillion, a deceleration of 1.9 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 8.9 percent year on year to RMB38.8 trillion, a deceleration of 2.4 percentage points from end-2021. Outstanding housing development loans dropped by 1.3 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion, a deceleration of 1.8 percentage points from end-2021. 7.2 The construction industry transforming toward the “30·60 goals” Construction, covering housing construction, civil construction, installation, decoration, and others, is a pillar industry in the economy. In 2021, the construction industry contributed 7 percent to China’s national GDP and employed more than 50 million people. In recent years, the industry rose up to the challenges brought about by the pandemic and other factors and ran smoothly. In Q1 2022, the industry remained an economic pillar as gross output rose by 9.2 percent year on year and the floor area of projects under construction grew by 3 percent year on year. In the meantime, whole-life carbon emissions in the construction industry, counted in building material production, building construction, and building operations, accounted for 50.6 percent of the total carbon emissions in China, 1 which made the industry a key segment for achieving the “30·60 goals” and posed a number of challenges to its transition. First, the production of building materials emits much carbon. Whole-life carbon emissions in the construction industry amounted to 5 billion tons in China, with the production of building materials including cement and steel taking up 55 percent. Second, the large number of existing buildings and those under construction places great pressures on carbon emissions control. China has the largest number of existing buildings and newly built buildings within a year, with the urban building stock standing at 65 billion square meters and newly-started construction in 2021 registering 2 billion square meters. Third, there is still room for improvement in design philosophy and building technology, as well as in the policies, technologies, and implementation systems of green buildings. In addition, pressure is mounting in the construction industry as the development model in real estate is shifting and the costs of raw materials and labor are climbing. In 2021, the growth rate of construction enterprises’ profits posted only 1.3 percent year on year. As for the industry, the profit-output ratio2 dropped to 2.9 percent and the number of employees decreased by 1.6 percent year on year, respectively. Moving forward, following The 14th Five-year Plan for the Development of the Construction Industry and the 14th Five-year Plan for Building Energy Efficiency and Green Building Development, it is suggested that the building performance should be continuously improved, the green and low-carbon transformation of the construction industry should be greatly boosted, and the coordinated development of intelligent construction and new construction industrialization should be accelerated. To achieve these, the following efforts are needed. First, advocating a green and low-carbon design philosophy for buildings, strengthening research and development of generic and core technology, and enabling better development and energy conservation for green construction. Second, transforming more buildings into green and energy-saving buildings and promoting the large-scale development of green buildings. It also helps by making existing residential buildings more energy efficient, strictly controlling the construction of high energy-consuming public buildings, and piloting the construction of zero carbon buildings. Third, improving the mechanism of the construction market by upgrading the management system of enterprise qualifications, strengthening the research and development of core technology, building a system of standards for advanced and applicable intelligent construction, and establishing a regulatory mechanism for the new construction market. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy In Q1, GDP saw year-on-year growth of 4.8 percent, and the Chinese economy was off to an overall stable start. Agricultural production was stable, and preparations for spring ploughing and sowing proceeded in an orderly manner. Industrial production grew rapidly, the momentum for innovation development continued, and industrial upgrading was a prominent driving force. Growth of the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector were significantly higher than that of all Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size (IEDS). The people's livelihood and residential income continued to improve. Investments in the manufacturing sector maintained rapid growth, and investments in infrastructure rebounded strongly. Green transformation proceeded steadily, with energy consumption per GDP continuing to decline. Foreign investment and foreign trade continued to achieve double-digit growth, an equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments, and foreign exchange reserves remained stable at over USD3.1 trillion. Macro policies were proactive, a sound monetary policy was implemented to intensify intertemporal adjustments, and the financial aggregate increased stably, providing stronger support for the real economy. The quality and efficiency of the proactive fiscal policy were enhanced, and effective investments were significantly accelerated. Overall, consumer prices are stable. In Q1 2022, due to the continuous decline of domestic pork prices, the CPI growth remained at a relatively low level, with a cumulative year-on-year increase of 1.1 percent. Specifically, the year-on-year increase in March registered 1.5 percent. In the future, the CPI may increase moderately compared with last year, but it will continue to move within a reasonable range. At the same time, year-on-year growth of the PPI in each month of Q1 moderated. Specifically, the PPI grew by 8.3 percent year on year in March, narrowing 5.2 percentage points from last year’s highest point. In the future, the overall downward trend of the PPI may continue, but it also needs to guard against the pressures of imported inflation brought about by the rise in global commodity prices. Overall, China’s economic performance remains within a reasonable range. The supply of industrial and agricultural products and services is generally adequate, the demand for consumption and investment is still in the recovery zone, and monetary policy remains sound, all of which are conducive to keeping prices stable for the medium and long term. Recently, COVID-19 and the crisis in Ukraine have led to an increase in risks and challenges, and the development environment of the Chinese economy is becoming more complex and severe, with increasing uncertainties. From an external perspective, first, the international geopolitical tensions have not only disrupted global food and energy supplies, resulting in large fluctuations in commodity prices, but also have disrupted supply chains and international trade, hindering the process of globalization. Second, inflation in the major developed economies has hit a decade high, and the developed countries are accelerating and stepping up efforts to tighten monetary policy, which may bring about new disruptions and spillover effects. Third, the global pandemic is still spreading, bringing disruptions and challenges to the world economic recovery. In April, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund lowered the global economic growth forecasts for 2022 by 0.9 and 0.8 percentage points to 3.2 and 3.6 percent, respectively. From a domestic perspective, the Chinese economy is still faced with triple pressures from shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakening expectations. An outstanding manifestation is that the recent outbreak of the pandemic has appeared in many places, with broad coverage and frequent occurrences, and it has a greater impact on economic performance. First, contact-based consumption in sectors such as catering, retail, and tourism is weakening, and investment in some sectors has not bottomed out. Second, some enterprises have halted or reduced production, and difficulties faced by market entities have obviously increased. Third, frictions appear in freight logistics and operations of the industrial chain and supply chain, which have constrained the smooth flow of economic circulation. However, it should be noted that there are many strategic advantages to China’s development at present. The Chinese economy is enormous in size with large room for policy maneuvering and it is highly resilient and vigorous. It also has a superlarge market, and the fundamentals for long-term steady growth remain unchanged. We have the capability and the conditions to overcome the difficulties and challenges and to achieve sustainable and healthy economic development. In response to the difficulties, we should remain confident, take proactive and decisive actions to cope with the changes and to overcome the difficulties, coordinate pandemic containment and socio-economic development, deepen reform and opening-up, ensure the people’s basic livelihood, and strive to stabilize the macro economy. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines made at the 19th CPC National Congress, the plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, and the Central Economic Work Conference, as well as the requirements set out in the Report on the Work of the Government. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will adhere to the principle of giving top priority to stability while pursuing progress, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully, and comprehensively, and accelerate the building of a new development paradigm. It will deepen the supply-side structural reform and support the efforts to stabilize growth, employment, and prices. Furthermore, it will build a modern central banking system, improve the modern monetary policy framework, and promote high-quality development. Striving to maintain macroeconomic stability, the PBC will keep the economic indicators within a reasonable range and do its part to set the stage for the upcoming 20th CPC National Congress. In pursuing a sound monetary policy, the PBC will step up support for the real economy, give top priority to stability, and act proactively to boost confidence. It will conduct intertemporal adjustments, resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies, and give play to the monetary policy tools in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure. It will effectively implement the financial policy measures aimed at stabilizing enterprises and securing employment, with a focus on giving support to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and COVID-stricken industries and groups. Through the proper use of monetary policy tools of different types, the PBC will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and make the growth of credit aggregates more stable, so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will continue to be basically in line with nominal economic growth and the macro leverage ratio will remain basically stable. By actively using structural monetary policy tools to provide additional support, the PBC will guide financial institutions to issue loans reasonably so as to channel more financial resources to key fields and weak links as well as to those enterprises and industries hit hard by COVID-19. It will increase, when appropriate, the quotas of central bank lending for the agricultural and rural sector and MSBs, while making good use of the inclusive MSB lending facility, the central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, and the special central bank lending for inclusive elderly care services. Concrete work will be done to put into use the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal. In addition, the PBC will enhance the marketoriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by optimizing the central bank policy rate system, strengthening the regulation of deposit rates, and bringing into play the important role of the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments. It will put more efforts into stabilizing bank liability costs, further tap into the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and bring down the overall financing costs for enterprises. Keeping a close watch on price movements, it will provide support for sufficient production and supply of food and energy and keep prices generally stable. Committed to a managed floating exchange- rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, the PBC will strengthen macro-prudential management of cross-border capital flows, enhance expectation management, and guide market entities to be risk-neutral, thereby maintaining the normal operation of the foreign exchange market and keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. While paying close attention to monetary policy shifts in the major advanced economies, the PBC will focus on domestic conditions and properly balance internal and external equilibria. In the meantime, it will uphold bottom-line thinking, improve the holistic approach, and make coordinated efforts to forestall and defuse major financial risks based on market principles and the rule of law. With these efforts, it will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risk will occur. First, the PBC will maintain stable growth in money, credit, and the AFRE. It will closely follow the development of a number of uncertainties at home and abroad to make in-depth analysis of liquidity supply and demand. While a mix of monetary policy tools will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, it will further improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of its operations to better stabilize market expectations. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, continue to ease liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on bank credit supply, cultivate and stimulate credit demand from the real economy, guide financial institutions to issue loans in a reasonable manner, and make the growth of credit aggregates more stable. In this way, the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE are expected to remain basically in line with nominal economic growth. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment by replenishing capital for commercial banks through multiple channels and stepping up support for small and medium-sized banks in their issuance of perpetual bonds and other capital replenishment instruments, thereby improving the capacity of banks to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will continue to bring into play the guiding role of structural monetary policy tools. It will make effective use of the policies on central bank lending and discounts for the agricultural and rural sector and MSBs, increase the quotas of such lending when appropriate, and give play to the inclusive MSB lending facility. At the same time, it will ramp up support for agro-related entities, for the service industries requiring direct contacts, such as the hotel and catering industry, wholesale, retail, and tourism, which have been severely affected by COVID-19, and for other industries that have prospects but have met with temporary difficulties due to the impact of COVID- 19. The PBC will continue to put into operation the special central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal, meet the reasonable demands regarding production and construction for coal security, coal purchases by power companies, coal reserves, and other fields of the like, and will help ensure the stable supply of energy, such as electricity and coal. With the practical application of the CERF, the PBC will increase support for major wind and photovoltaic power bases and the upgrading of the supporting coal-fired power plants. The aim is to promote the transition to a green and low-carbon economy while ensuring a secure energy supply. In addition, the PBC will pick up pace in moving ahead with the implementation of the two lending facilities, i.e., the special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and that for inclusive elderly care services, which will provide support for the issuance of loans that meet the criteria. These measures will guide financial institutions to intensify financial support for enterprises in their technological development and transformation and for institutions offering inclusive elderly care services. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. More work will be done to implement the financial relief policies already introduced. The PBC will urge and guide financial institutions to act in a proactive and targeted manner and issue loans reasonably. It will require financial institutions to make every effort to support MSBs in difficulty and provide differentiated financial services for COVID-stricken sectors. It will step up financial support for core enterprises in the industrial and supply chains and support the healthy development of private businesses. All-out efforts will be made to provide financial safeguards for food security as well as the production and sales of major agricultural products. Moreover, the PBC will provide financial services to support the supply of coal and other energies while stepping up financial support for the smooth operation of logistics and transport as well as for effective investment. It will push for the implementation of the circular on providing financial support for the priority work in rural revitalization, guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, take targeted measures early on, and effectively ramp up financial support for the agricultural sector, rural areas, and farmers, thereby moving further ahead with rural revitalization. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance and support fine-tuning of real estate policies based on local realities to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions. Meanwhile, it will increase financial support for the rental of housing, protect the legitimate rights and interests of consumers in the market, and promote the healthy development of the real estate market to foster a virtuous circle. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by optimizing the central bank policy rate system and guiding market rates to move around the policy rates. The PBC will strengthen the regulation of deposit rates and bring into play the important role of the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments. It will put more efforts into stabilizing bank liability costs, further tap into the LPR reform, and bring down the overall financing costs for enterprises. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, and give play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. Furthermore, it will strengthen expectation management and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market. Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will improve the services of exchange rate risk management for enterprises, offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept, on reducing the costs of risk hedging for enterprises, and on strengthening risk management of their foreign exchange businesses, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. The PBC will continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by further expanding the use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepening international monetary cooperation, and developing offshore RMB markets. In addition, it will conduct pilot projects for the high-quality opening-up of cross-border trade and investment, further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account. Fifth, the PBC will make continued efforts to deepen financial reform, and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, it will deepen the reform of large commercial banks and establish a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. The reform of development financial institutions and policy financial institutions will continue, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities. By doing so, they will better play their roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBC will optimize the administrative framework for the issuance of financial bonds and steadily promote a higher-quality opening-up of the bond market. It will also enhance the efficiency and interconnectivity of the multi-tiered market system, cultivate diversified and qualified investors, and boost innovation in the bond market to intensify its support for key fields and weak links. More work will be done to improve the legal system for the bond market, to tighten requirements for information disclosures, and to strengthen regulation over intermediary institutions. Meanwhile, the PBC will reinforce monitoring and resolution of bond market risks and act in a timely way to forestall and defuse the risks. It will step up efforts on unified law enforcement in the bond market, and crack down on illegal and irregular conduct. Sixth, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential management system as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning and to enrich the macro-prudential policy tools in the toolkit. The PBC will improve the regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will push systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. At the same time, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve their total loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention abilities. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate financial holding companies. Work will move on stably to implement the requirement that non-financial enterprises which fall under the prescribed circumstances should apply for the establishment of financial holding companies according to the law. And the PBC will continue to improve the relevant rules and regulations to promote the well-regulated and sustainable development of financial holding companies. Furthermore, it will strengthen the financial legal system. With the drafting of the Law on Financial Stability and the establishment of the Financial Stability Fund, it will institutionalize and further improve the long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution, aiming to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is market-oriented and law-based. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” the PBC will prevent and defuse financial risks by focusing on its top priorities. It will adopt differentiated approaches in the process, reduce existing risks， and strictly guard against emerging risks. It will keep a close watch on risks in key fields and enhance the foresightedness, timeliness, and effectiveness of risk identification, while enriching and improving early corrective measures. It will leverage regulatory resources and risk resolution resources in a coordinated manner by strengthening both horizontal and vertical coordination. The PBC will work to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement the corresponding measures. It will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards, thereby defending the bottom line whereby no systemic risk will occur. Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2022, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and has implemented the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, and the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. The PBC has put stable growth in a more prominent position and strengthened implementation of the sound monetary policy. It has also given full play to monetary policy instruments for both aggregate and structural adjustments. Money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) have witnessed reasonable growth, the credit structure has been improved continuously, and overall financing costs have steadily declined, providing robust support for stabilizing the macro economy. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has given top priority to the stability of monetary policy, made progress while maintaining stability, and taken prompt measures at an early stage based on changes in the macro situation. It has adopted a mix of instruments, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, turning over profits to the central treasury, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs), to inject liquidity into the market. It has also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner, kept liquidity in the banking system adequate at a reasonable level, and brought down money market interest rates, creating a favorable liquidity environment for stabilizing the macro economy and keeping the economic indicators within a reasonable range. At end-June 2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.5 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew rapidly, and lending rates remained at low levels Credit support for the real economy was strengthened. Since the beginning of Q2, due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the downward pressures on the economy, enterprises, especially micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), have been faced with increasing operational difficulties, For a period of time, their demands for credit have been waning and the growth of loans has slowed down. In response, the PBC successively held a number of symposia on the monetary and credit situations, inviting participation by major financial institutions, the PBC branches at various levels, and its affiliated institutions, as well as the heads of the policy banks, respectively. Financial institutions were encouraged to increase lending based on prudent operations and in line with market-based principles. With the accelerated implementation of a package of policies and measures to stabilize the economy, positive results have been achieved to contain COVID-19, market expectations have been improving, and marginal demand for credit has been picking up since late May. RMB-denominated loans witnessed a substantial year-on-year increase in both May and June. At end-June, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 10.8 percent year on year to RMB212.3 trillion, an increase of RMB13.8 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB629.2 billion. Outstanding RMB-denominated loansgrew 11.2 percent year on year to RMB206.4 trillion, up RMB13.7 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB919.2 billion. Box 1 Implementation of Financial Policies to Facilitate an Economic Recovery Since the beginning of 2022, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC has, implemented the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council by attaching more importance to stabilizing growth. It has enhanced implementation of sound monetary policies, given better play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy tools, strengthened the guiding role of credit policies, and provided relief for market entities so as to prop up the macro economy. First, credit support for the real economy has been increased. The PBC has adopted a mix of tools, such as the RRR cut, the MLF, central bank lending and discounts, and OMOs, to inject more liquidity into the economy and to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The PBC has also accelerated the pace of turning over surplus profits to the central budget, which reached RMB1 trillion as of end-July, with the effects equivalent to a sweeping RRR cut of 0.5 percentage points. It has held a series of meetings, attended by heads of policy banks, major financial institutions, and the PBC branches and affiliated institutions, to analyze the monetary and credit situations, and to encourage financial institutions to issue more loans in accordance with market-based principles as long as they abide by operational prudence. Second, financial institutions have been encouraged to allow market entities affected by COVID-19 to defer repayments of principal and interest. On April 18, the PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) jointly released Notice on Strengthening Financial Services for COVID-19 Containment and Socio-Economic Development, supporting the affected populations by encouraging flexible adjustments to repayment plans for their mortgage and other personal loans, such as appropriately deferring the repayment deadlines, extending the loan terms, and postponing repayment of the principal. As a measure in the policy package of the State Council to stabilize the economy, financial institutions have also been encouraged to allow deferred repayment of principal and interest on loans to MSMEs, self-employed businesses, and truck drivers, as well as on mortgage loans, consumer loans, and other loans to individuals affected by COVID-19. Financial bonds for freight and logistics have been rolled out to support bond issuances by three types of non-bank financial institutions, including auto group finance companies, auto financial companies, and financial leasing companies. The money raised will be used exclusively to support deferred repayments of loans by truck owners and logistics firms and to provide them with additional funds.Third, structural monetary policy instruments have provided targeted liquidity support. The PBC has continued to make good use of central bank lending and discounts to support inclusive finance. At end-June, central bank lending to support rural development and micro and small businesses (MSBs) registered RMB540.4 billion and RMB1.3997 trillion, respectively, while central bank discounts posted RMB614.5 billion, with the three totaling RMB2.5546 trillion. The PBC has enhanced the support plan for inclusive MSB loans. It has strengthened positive incentives, increasing the share of funding support for the plan from 1 percent to 2 percent. It has also launched the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal, and it has increased the quota of the latter by RMB100 billion to support coal development and use and to boost the coal reserve capacity. In addition, it has established special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and transportation and logistics so as to mobilize more support from financial institutions. Fourth, enterprise financing costs have been reduced. The one-year and five-year loan prime rates (LPR) have fallen by 0.1 percentage points and 0.2 percentage points respectively, since the beginning of this year. The monetary policy transmission mechanism featuring “market rates+central bank guidance→LPR→lending rates” has been increasingly facilitated. As a result, lending rates for businesses have hit a record low. Under the guidance of the PBC, the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rates has improved the formation of the self-regulated ceiling of deposit rates, established a market-based adjustment mechanism of deposit rates, and encouraged deposit rates to float with the market rates. The PBC has also guided the self-regulatory mechanism to release the Initiatives on Reinforcing Self-Regulatory Management for Agreement Deposits, in a bid to regulate the pricing of interest rates on agreement deposits and other deposit products, to urge the orderly reduction of malpractices, and to uphold benign competition in the deposit market. Fifth, diversified financing channels have been expanded. Financial institutions are encouraged to issue special financial bonds for agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, and for MSBs, so as to expand their available sources of funds for lending. Since the beginning of this year, twenty commercial banks have issued a total of RMB215.5 billion special financial bonds for MSBs, while four commercial banks have issued a total of RMB8.4 billion of special financial bonds for agriculture, rural areas, and farmers. The raised funds are used to grant MSB and agro-related loans. The Unified Registration of Security Interests Over Movable Properties and Rights, Receivable Financing Service Platform of the Credit Reference Center (CRC), and the Supply Chain Commercial Paper Platform have been brought into full play to enhance the circulation efficiency of enterprise receivables. Due to these platforms, 365,000entries of receivable financing had been processed by end-June 2022, totaling RMB16.7 trillion. Specifically, the number and value of MSB financing reached 295,000 deals and RMB13 trillion, respectively. Sixth, financial institutions have been encouraged to enhance support for the development of infrastructure and major projects. The PBC has worked along with the relevant departments to enhance the connections between banks and enterprises. A list of major projects was developed for key sectors, such as transportation, energy, and water conservancy, with reference to which financial institutions could match the supply of medium- and long-term loans with effective demand. The credit line for development and policy banks has been raised by RMB800 billion, and RMB300 billion worth of policy and development financial instruments have been launched so as to support the issuance of medium- and long-term infrastructure loans. Development and policy banks have also been guided to accelerate project reserves, to break down tasks, to enhance assessment and incentives, and to streamline procedures for the granting of loans, in an effort to enhance the capability of lending to infrastructure. In the meantime, syndicated loans and a PPP model have been leveraged to mobilize funding from commercial banks and social capital. Overall, since the beginning of 2022 monetary policy has been more forward-looking, precise, and independent backed by proactive measures, and the financial sector has been improving the quality and efficiency of its services for the real economy. Money and credit have grown at a reasonable pace. At end-June, broad money M2, outstanding AFRE, and outstanding RMB loans grew by 11.4 percent, 10.8 percent, and 11.2 percent year on year, respectively, all remaining at a high level of above 10 percent, thus indicating stronger financial support for the real economy. Financing costs for businesses have declined remarkably. In June, the weighted average rate on corporate loans registered 4.16 percent, hitting a record low. The credit structure has continued to improve. At end-June, outstanding inclusive MSB loans reached RMB22 trillion, up 23.8 percent year on year, maintaining growth of over 20 percent for thirty-eight consecutive months. The credit supply of financial institutions for sectors affected by COVID-19 has increased steadily. At end-June, outstanding loans to the accommodations and catering sector, wholesale and retail sector, transportation, warehousing, and postal sector, culture, and sports and entertainment sector totaled RMB30.69 trillion, representing an increase of RMB1.81 trillion from the beginning of the year, RMB173 billion more than the increase during the same period in 2021. A national directory containing a total of 685,000 enterprises in sectors affected by COVID-19 and key enterprises in the supply chain has been established. RMB10.2 trillion in loans has been issued to these enterprises, helping 39.5 million people retain and find jobs.The credit structure improved continuously. At end-June, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB6.2 trillion, compared with those at the beginning of the year, accounting for 54.6 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year (YOY) growth of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 29.7 percent, 18.5 percentage points higher than that of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 23.8 percent year on year, 12.6 percentage points higher than that of total loans, to support 52.39 million MSBs, a rise of 36.8 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rate of loans was at a statistically low level. The PBC has continuously deepened the market-oriented reform of interest rates and has given play to the role of the LPR reform, thereby enhancing competition in the credit market. In the meantime, the PBC has improved regulation of deposit interest rates and it has set up a market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates so as to maintain benign competitive order in the market, to stabilize costs of bank liabilities, and to continuously bring down lending rates. In June, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.70 percent and 4.45 percent, respectively, down 0.10 percentage points and 0.20 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. In June, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.41 percent, down 0.52 percentage point year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.76 percent, down 0.44 percentage points year on year, while that on corporate lending fell by 0.42 percentage points year on year to 4.16 percent. On the whole, the interest rates on RMB-denominated loans witnessed a further decline from those in March, manifesting robust financial support for the real economy.In June, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 62.39 percent, 7.82 percent, and 29.80 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In June, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 0.28 percent and 1.49 percent, respectively, up 0.18 percentage points and 1.19 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six months registered 2.34 percent and 2.58 percent, up 1.23 and 1.46 percentage points from December 2021, respectively.The growth of deposits picked up steadily. At end-June, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies of all financial institutions increased 10.5 percent year on year to RMB257.7 trillion, up RMB19.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB4.3 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 10.8 percent year on year to RMB251.1 trillion, an increase of RMB18.8 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB4.8 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD986.7 billion, a decrease of USD10.3 billion from the beginning of 2022 and a deceleration of USD140 billion.III. Money supply and the AFRE grew at a reasonable pace Money and credit aggregates maintained reasonable growth, providing robust support for the real economy. At end-June, outstanding broad money M2, narrow money M1, and currency in circulation M0 registered RMB258.1 trillion, RMB67.4 trillion, and RMB9.6 trillion, respectively, up 11.4 percent, 5.8 percent, and 13.8 percent year on year, respectively. The first half of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB518.6 billion, RMB515.4 billion more than that in the same period of 2021. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB334.27 trillion at end-June. Its year-on-year growth registered 10.8 percent, up 0.5 percentage points compared with that at end-2021. In the first half of 2022, the AFRE increment totaled RMB21 trillion, RMB3.2 trillion more than that in the same period of 2021. The structure of the AFRE featured the following: first, the increment of RMB loans grew significantly year on year. In the first half of 2022, the increment of RMB loans issued by financial institutions to the real economy grew by RMB632.9 billion year on year to RMB13.58 trillion, accounting for 64.6 percent of the AFRE increment during the same period. Second, the increment of government bonds and corporate bonds increased year on year, and they were RMB2.2 trillion and RMB391.3 billion more than those in the corresponding period of the previous year, respectively. Third, off-balance-sheet financing decreased at a slower pace. Specifically, in the first half of 2022 the decreases in entrusted and trust loans were RMB109.1 billion and RMB348.7 billion less than those in the first half of 2021 respectively, while the decrease in undiscounted bankers’ acceptances was RMB171.4 billion more than that in the same period of 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions decreased by a larger margin year on year, while loans written off grew more than in the previous year.IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level Since the beginning of 2022, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and market expectations have been generally stable. The market has played a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, and the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In the first half of the year, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate witnessed both an appreciation and a depreciation against a basket of currencies. At end-June, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 102.01 and 100.61, respectively, down 0.5 percent and up 0.3 percent from end-2021, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end of 2021 to end-June 2022, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) of the RMB remained flat, while the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB depreciated 4.0 percent. From 2005, when the reform of RMB exchange rate formation regime began, to end-June 2022, the NEER and the REER of the RMB appreciated 48.7 percent and 51.8 percent, respectively. In the first half of this year, the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar depreciated slightly. At end-June, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.7114, depreciating 5.0 percent from end-2021 and appreciating 23.3 percent on a cumulative basis since the beginning of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005. In the first half of 2022, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 5.2 percent. In the first half of 2022, cross-border RMB settlements increased 16 percent year on year to RMB20.3 trillion, with RMB receipts and payments posting RMB10.0 trillion and RMB10.3 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 27 percent year on year to RMB4.6 trillion. Specifically, RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB3.5 trillion, while RMB settlements of trade in services and under other items registered RMB1.1 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB15.7 trillion, increasing 13 percent year on year. Box 2 The Weight of the Renminbi Raised in the SDR Currency Basket On May 11, 2022, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) completed its quinquennial review of the SDR valuation, and it decided to raise the weight of the RMB in the SDR currency basket from 10.92 percent to 12.28 percent, still ranking third. The Executive Board decided that the new SDR currency basket would come into effect on August 1, 2022. The SDR, created as a supplementary reserve asset by the IMF in 1969, composes international reserves along with other reserves such as gold and foreign currencies. It also serves as the unit of account for the IMF and other international organizations. At present, the SDR has been mainly used for transactions between IMF members with the IMF or other international financial organizations, which can be used to exchange for freely usable currencies, to repay loans of the IMF, to pay interest, and to pay for the share incurred by the increase in capital. Effective on October 1, 2016, the RMB joined the US dollar, euro, Japanese yen, and British pound sterling in the SDR basket, with a weight of 10.92 percent. The criteria for the SDR valuation reviews by the IMF mainly fall into two categories. First, the export criterion means the exports of goods and services by some country or region must rank among the top of the world. Second, the currencies are freely usable,which means that they are widely used to make payments for international transactions and they are widely traded in the principal exchange markets. In practice, it is calculated by the proportion of the currency in official reserves, in foreign exchange transactions, and in the liabilities of the international debt securities and banking industry. The formula for determining the currency weights in the SDR basket is as follows: the currency weight = 1/2*the proportion of a country’s exports against the world+1/6*the proportion of the currency in the official reserves+1/6*the proportion of the foreign exchange transactions denominated in the currency+1/6*the proportion of the international debt securities and outstanding liabilities of international banking industries denominated in the currency. This was the first review since the RMB was included in the SDR basket in 2016. During this review period, all the indicators of the RMB witnessed rises, except for the international debt securities. Specifically, in terms of exports, the proportion of China’s exports increased from 10.5 percent during the previous review period to 12 percent during the present review period. During the past few years, China has overcome the impact of COVID-19 and it has witnessed steady growth in the volume of its exports. In terms of the proportion in official reserves, the proportion of RMB has increased form 1.2 percent in 2017 to 2.88 percent in Q1 2022. In terms of foreign exchange transactions, and according to the three-yearly BIS survey on foreign exchange and the derivatives, the proportion of RMB foreign exchange transactions has risen from 2.0 percent in 2016 to 2.2 percent in 2019, ranking number eight worldwide. In terms of the liabilities of international debt securities and the banking industry, since 2017 the proportion of international debt securities denominated in RMB has remained at 0.3 percent, and that of the liabilities in the international banking industry denominated in RMB has edged up from 0.8 percent to 1.1 percent, which still has room for growth. Since the official inclusion of the RMB in the SDR basket in 2016, in line with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC, together with the relevant departments, has had the courage to take on responsibilities and overcome difficulties by continuously promoting the reform and opening-up of the financial sector and cross-border use of the RMB. Major progress has been made in the market-oriented reform of the RMB interest rates and exchange rate. The opening-up of the financial market has been continuously enhanced. Constant efforts have been made to broaden the investment channels, to enrich the portfolio of investable assets, and to simplify the investment procedures. With continued improvement in the business environment, RMB assets investments by overseas investors have been further facilitated. Currently, overseas investors can trade in the Chinese bond market through channels such as the Northbound Trading, direct trading, and the QFII/RQFII, and they can trade in the Chinese stock market through channelssuch as the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect/Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect and the QFII/RQFII. In addition, they can participate in the trading of Chinese wealth management products and commodity futures through the Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect and designated futures trading. As of end-June 2022, outstanding RMB financial assets held by overseas investors posted RMB 10.1 trillion. Specifically, the volume of both stocks and bonds stood at RMB 3.6 trillion, 5.5 times and 4.3 times those at end-2016, respectively. Meanwhile, the RMB is regarded as the official reserve currency by more economies, and use of the RMB by domestic and overseas entities in cross-border settlements has witnessed steady growth. According to the Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER) statistics released by the IMF, as of end-Q1 2022, the volume of global RMB reserves amounted to USD336.39 billion, accounting for 2.88 percent of official global reserves. Since 2017, the annual growth of cross-border receipts and payments of the RMB under trade in goods and trade in services averaged 15 percent and 17 percent, respectively. The increase in the weight of the RMB means the international community acknowledges the achievements of China in reform and opening-up, which is conducive to further enhancing the role of the RMB as an international reserve currency and to strengthening the international appeal of RMB assets. Going forward, under the unified arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, together with other financial regulators, the PBC will continue to steadfastly promote China’s reform and opening-up of the financial sector, further simplify the procedures for overseas investors to enter the Chinese market, enrich the portfolio of investable assets, improve the disclosure of data, continuously improve the business environment, extend the trading hours of the interbank foreign exchange market, and constantly facilitate investment in the Chinese market, so as to create a more favorable environment for overseas investors and international institutions to invest in China. Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q2 2022, with resolute implementation of the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, and in line with the requirements that COVID-19 should be contained, the economy should be stabilized, and the development should be safe, the PBC soundly conducted a package of policies and measures, enhanced implementation of the sound monetary policy, gave full play to the dual functions of monetary policy tools in adjusting the credit aggregate and structure, guided financial institutions to ramp up support for the real economy, especially for micro and small businesses (MSBs), green development, and tech innovation, earnestly served the real economy, and effectively prevented andcontained financial risks, thereby contributing to sustaining stable macroeconomic performance. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Flexible operations to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. In Q2 2022, the PBC paid close attention to the changes in the macroeconomic and financial circumstances at home and abroad and took into full consideration the impact of multiple factors related to liquidity supply, such as the Russia-Ukraine conflict, the sporadic COVID-19 resurgences in China, and the advance issuance of government bonds. Adopting a mix of tools, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending, and the turning over of surplus profits, the PBC injected medium and long-term liquidity into the banking system. It continued to conduct open market operations on a daily basis, and it kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, providing a favorable liquidity environment for the successful issuance of government bonds and for the financial sector to serve the real economy. Due to the sufficient funding supply in the money market, since Q2 the demand of primary dealers for reverse repos operations has witnessed an overall decline in the open market. With respect to fund supply and demand, the PBC flexibly adjusted the scale of open market operations and further enhanced the flexibility and precision of operations. In Q2, the weighted average interest rates of the 7-day repos (DR007) posted 1.72 percent, decreasing 37 basis points and 44 basis points from Q1 and the previous Q2, respectively. Since July, the bidding volume of primary dealers continuously declined, and the PBC correspondingly reduced the volume of repos operations, which could fully satisfy the demand of the bidding institutions. Open-market operations by the PBC is a tool used to adjust short-term liquidity, and it is a normal phenomenon to flexibly adjust the volume with respect to changes in the supply and demand of liquidity. Starting from Q2 2022, the rates paid on the 7-day repos and the MLF have both remained unchanged, which has been conducive to achieving an internal and external equilibrium under the backdrop of interest rate hikes by the major global central banks. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q2 2022, the PBC conducted three batches of CBS operations, totaling RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized banks, and in strengthening credit supply capacities.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q2 2022, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. The regular issuance of central bank bills and the development of the central bank bill repos market in Hong Kong enriched the scope of RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in Hong Kong, which played an active role in promoting the sound development of the offshore RMB money market and bond market. II. Conducting medium-term lending facility and standing lending facility operations in a timely manner Conducting MLF operations in a timely manner. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions of medium-term policy rates for interest rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1.65 trillion of MLF operations in H1 2022, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.85 percent, which was on par with that at end-2021. In particular, MLF operations conducted in Q2 amounted to RMB450 billion. At end-June, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.95 trillion, RMB400 billion more than that at the beginning of 2022. Conducting well-timed SLF operations. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations, strengthen the stability of liquidity in the bankingsystem, and forestall liquidity risks. In H1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB8.38 billion of standing lending facility (SLF) operations, of which operations in Q2 registered RMB1.96 billion. The balance of SLF operations at end-June posted RMB1.34 billion. The SLF rate served as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor and promoted the smooth operation of the money market. At end-June, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.95 percent, 3.10 percent, and 3.45 percent, respectively, unchanged from those at end-March. III. Lowering the required reserve ratio for financial institutions The required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered in an attempt to support the real economy and to promote the steady decline in overall financing costs. The PBC reduced the RRR by 0.25 percentage points, effective on April 25, 2022 (not applicable to financial institutions that had already implemented an RRR of 5 percent). In order to ramp up support for MSBs as well as agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, urban commercial banks operating businesses within the province of registration and rural commercial banks implementing an RRR of over 5 percent enjoyed an additional RRR cut of 0.25 percentage points. The RRR reduction released about RMB530 billion of long-term funds, and after the RRR cut, the weighted average RRR for financial institutions stood at 8.1 percent. The purposes of the RRR cut were as follows. First, it aimed to optimize the funding structure of financial institutions, expand their sources of long-term stable funding, enhance their capabilities to allocate funds, and ramp up support for the real economy. Second, it aimed to guide financial institutions to make good use of the funds released by the RRR cut to support industries as well as micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) that were hard hit by COVID-19. Third, the RRR cut lowered the funding costs for financial institutions by approximately RMB6.5 billion per year, which would promote a reduction in overall financing costs through the transmission of financial institutions. The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was lowered for financial institutions so as to enhance their foreign exchange allocation capabilities. The PBC lowered the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by 1 percentage point, from 9 percent to 8 percent, effective on May 15, 2022, which would release around USD10 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. IV. Further improving the macro prudential management framework The role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) was given full play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In H1 2022, the PBC further optimized the MPA assessment framework and guided financial institutions to enhance stability in the growth of credit aggregates and to ramp up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to themanufacturing sector, and for green development. The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was improved. To implement the Guiding Opinions on Improving Regulation of Systemically Important Financial Institutions, the PBC and the CBIRC jointly drafted the Assessment Methodology of Systemically Important Insurance Companies (Exposure Draft), soliciting public comments from July 8. The exposure draft stipulates the coverage, methods, procedures, thresholds, and standards for the assessment of China’s systemically important insurance companies. The top ten largest insurance companies (groups) by assets were proposed for assessment in terms of four respects, including business scale, relevance, assets realization, and substitutability. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs, central bank discounts, and other policy instruments to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and vulnerable spots in the national economy and for coordinated regional development. The PBC continued to leverage the role of central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and as a positive incentive, which contributed to connecting the consolidation of achievements in poverty eradication with rural revitalization. Central bank lending for supporting rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to current regulations so as to consolidate achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBC promoted coordinated regional development by continuously guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces to make good use of policy instruments, such as central bank lending, and to expand credit supply for vulnerable parts of the economy within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private enterprises. Stepped-up efforts were made to provide relief and assistance for MSBs, and locally incorporated financial institutions were guided to employ central bank lending for MSBs and self-employed businesses that were heavily hit by surging commodity prices and COVID-19, so as to reduce their financing costs. At end-June, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB540.4 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.3997 trillion and RMB165.6 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB614.5 billion. In H1 2022, the PBC made net withdrawals of pledged supplementary lending (PSLs) in the amount of RMB181.4 billion from development and policy banks, with the outstanding PSLs registering RMB2.6203 trillion at end-June. Continuously implementing instruments in support of inclusive MSB loans to bolster the development of MSBs. In January, according to the decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council, from the beginning of 2022 to end-June 2023, for inclusive MSB loans issued by locally incorporated banks, the PBC would provide funding on a quarterly basis in the amount of 1 percent of the incremental balance of these loans so as to encourage banks to extend inclusive MSB loans. In May, according to the new decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council, the PBC made an adjustment to the aforementioned supportive policy, lifting the proportion of funding support from 1 percent to 2 percent, effective from the beginning of Q2 2022. In Q2, the PBC provided RMB8.337 billion of funding to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increase of RMB419.3 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Simultaneously implementing both the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal, so as to support the green and low-carbon transition of the economy. In May, the quota for special central bank lending was increased by RMB100 billion to support sectors relevant to the development and use of coal and the enhancement of the coal reserve capacity. In Q2, through these two instruments, the PBC provided relevant institutions with RMB44.1 billion and RMB14.8 billion, respectively, or total funding of RMB58.9 billion. Since implementation of these two instruments, the PBC has cumulatively provided RMB182.7 billion and RMB35.7 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB218.4 billion. Establishing the special central bank lending facility for the transport and logistics sectors to support road freight transport enterprises and truck drivers that were severely hit by COVID-19. According to the decisions of the State Council’s executive meetings, with the aim of providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives and in line with market-oriented principles, the PBC established the special central bank lending facility for the transport and logistics sectors. In May, the PBC and the Ministry of Transport jointly issued Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for the Transport and Logistics Sectors (Yinfa No.120 [2022]). The facility adopts a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a quarterly basis. Specifically, financial institutions are subject to their own decision-making at their own risk, and they can apply for funding support from the PBC under the special central bank lending facility after they grant loans to eligible enterprises in the relevant industries. For qualified loans, the PBC provides funding for 100 percent of the principal through central bank lending, with an interest rate of 1.75 percent. Accelerating implementation of the three policy instruments for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and the transport and logistics sectors, respectively. As scheduled, the first application of the special central bank lendingfacilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and the transport and logistics sectors will be open in July, and the PBC is now making orderly preparations for it. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reforms The long-term mechanisms for providing financial services for MSBs are taking shape. To address the financial institutions’ lack of intrinsic motivations to serve MSBs and inefficient external incentives and restraints, the PBC issued the Notice on Promoting the Establishment of Long-Term Mechanisms for Boosting the Confidence, Willingness, Capability, and Professionalism of Financial Institutions to Lend to Micro and Small Businesses. The Notice urges financial institutions to improve error tolerance and risk mitigation mechanisms, boost positive incentives and evaluation and assessment criteria, ensure funds availability and build funding channels, promote technological empowerment and product innovation, and enhance their willingness, capacity, and sustainability to serve MSBs, so as to boost the volume and coverage of financing for MSBs and to reduce the costs. As of end-June, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs registered RMB22 trillion, with a year-on-year growth of 23.8 percent. The loans supported 52.39 million MSBs, increasing 36.8 percent year on year. The weighted average rate on new inclusive MSB loans posted 4.82 percent in June, dropping 37 basis points from May. Financial support for rural revitalization has been enhanced. The PBC facilitated implementation of the Opinions on Ensuring Financial Support for Full Promotion of Key Rural Revitalization Initiatives in 2022 to guide financial institutions to strengthen financial safeguards for food security, increase financial support for a strong foundation for modern agriculture, and for the sustainable development of rural industries, and to encourage all types of financial institutions to tap into medium- and long-term credit models in support of agricultural and rural infrastructure. The PBC conducted appraisals and evaluations of financial institutions serving rural revitalization for 2021. Application of the evaluation results has been strengthened to further improve the quality and efficiency of financial services in promotion of rural revitalization. As of end-June 2022, outstanding agro-related loans registered RMB47.1 trillion, growing 13.1 percent year on year. Box 3 Changes in the Credit Structure in Recent Years Changes in the credit structure reflect changes in the economic structure. They also promote development of the real economy. Since 2010, facilitated by accelerating urbanization, economic transition, as well as stabilization and structural policies, thecredit structure in China witnessed changes featuring the following characteristics: the share of loans to the manufacturing sector bottomed out; the share of inclusive loans to MSBs steadily increased; the share of loans to the infrastructure sector dropped slowly from a high level; and the share of loans to the real estate sector first surged and then turned downward. The credit structure has improved, particularly since 2019. Roughly speaking, of the RMB206 trillion loans outstanding at end-June 2022, inclusive MSB loans and loans to the manufacturing sector comprised 10 percent each, and loans to infrastructure and real estate comprised 20 percent and 25 percent, respectively. Financial support for inclusive MSBs has been increasing in recent years.From a credit demand perspective, an improved economic structure and the need for high-quality development were the main driving forces toward credit structure optimization. This is reflected first in the bottom-out and rebound of the proportion of manufacturing sector loans. The 14th Five-Year Plan set for a basically stable proportion of the manufacturing industry, relying on support from the financial sector. Under efforts by various parties, the downward trend in the proportion of manufacturing sector loans was put to a stop after the figure dropped from 17 percent in 2010 to 9 percent in 2020. It then increased to 9.4 percent at end-June 2022. In particular, medium- and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector maintained high growth of more than 20 percent since June 2020. The combined growing quantity and improved term structure buttressed the bottom-out of the manufacturing value added as a share of GDP, which recovered from its lowest point of 26.3 percent in 2020 to 29 percent at end-June 2022. Second, inclusive loans to MSBs surged and delivered significant corporate and public benefits. Outstanding inclusive MSB loans at end-June 2022 posted RMB22 trillion, which was 2.7 times the amount at end-2018. The proportion of these loans at end-June rose to 10.6 percent. Meanwhile, thenumber of MSBs granted these loans reached 52.39 million, 2.9 times the number at end-2018. Third, the credit demand of capital-intensive industries, including infrastructure and real estate, turned downward. As the infrastructure investment structure leaned toward urban renovation, utilities, and other public welfare areas, credit demand for traditional infrastructure projects such as railways and highways subdued. The proportion of loans to this sector dropped accordingly, from 25 percent in 2010 to about 19 percent since 2019. The proportion of real estate loans also declined from the peak of 29 percent in 2019 to 25.7 percent at end-June 2022. From a credit supply perspective, the PBC continuously improved the structural monetary policy instruments to meet the demand for high-quality economic development and to leverage the role of credit policy in guiding structural reforms. The PBC increased the quota for central bank lending for rural development,and MSBs and central bank discounts, and set up a number of structural monetary instruments, including support instruments for inclusive MSB loans, the CERF and special central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use, central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, special central bank lending for inclusive elderly care, and special central bank lending for transportation and logistics. These structural policy instruments are focused, reasonable, appropriate, and flexible. Meanwhile, a working mechanism was established under which financial institutions issue loans independently and practice ledger management; the PBC offers reimbursements and sets the limits; and relevant authorities specify loan purposes and carry out random inspections. This connected loans issued by financial institutions to central bank lending. It created an incentive-compatible mechanism through low-cost central bank lending or incentive funds, which encourages financial institutions to improve their credit structure and channels more financial resources to inclusive finance, green development, and sci-tech innovation. Since 2018, together with the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission, the PBC guided financial institutions to strengthen support for inclusive finance and MSBs through a mix of policy measures and regulatory appraisals. The PBC promoted the establishment of long-term mechanisms for supporting MSBs and played its role in precisely guiding optimization of the credit structure. Looking forward, credit growth will be adaptive to Chinese economic progress gearing from high growth to quality growth. A stable aggregate and sound structure will be prioritized. It should be noted that the marginal deceleration of urbanization and the changing trend in long-term real estate cycles have weakened the traditionally massive demand for loans to the infrastructure and real estate sectors. Meanwhile, as inclusive MSB loans and loans to high-tech manufacturing are still small in volume and direct financing is on the rise, credit growth may drop during the shift of growth drivers and in the adjustment process of the financing structure.However, this is consistent with the economy’s new normal. It does not mean that financial support to the real economy is diminishing, and the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the economy will still be in line with nominal economic growth. In the medium to long term, credit growth in China will focus more on stable aggregates and sound structures. New growth drivers, such as green investment, new infrastructure, new urbanization initiatives, and major projects, can to some extent provide support for credit growth. In addition, credit resources will continue leaning toward key areas and weak links, and the quality and suitability of financial support for new growth drivers will be steadily improved. According to relevant research institutes, the investment demand in China’s green transition toward emissions peak and carbon neutrality exceeds RMB100 trillion. In the 14th Five-Year Plan period, new infrastructure investment is estimated to be more than RMB10 trillion. Therefore, these investments will likely deliver an annual average of RMB5 trillion in the upcoming period. In the next stage, the PBC will adapt to the requirements of the new development stage, maintain the sound monetary policy, further facilitate improvement in the credit structure, ensure more efficient financial resource allocations, accelerate building and improving systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, and work to achieve a dynamic equilibrium between stable aggregates and sound structures. To achieve this, first, it is necessary for the PBC to properly manage the relationship between traditional growth drivers and new structural growth potentials by “simultaneously phasing out the old and setting up the new, and securing faster progress on the latter,” so as to enhance the stability of credit aggregate growth and save time for fostering new growth drivers. Second, it is necessary to seize a favorable time window for “setting up” new growth drivers. The PBC will guide credit resources toward key areas of economic transition and delve into green investment, the renovation of old urban communities, high-tech manufacturing, sci-tech innovation, and other structural potentials, so as to facilitate a virtuous circle between finance and the real economy. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has continued to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform. The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform were continuously unleashed, while the regulations over deposit interest rates were improved, thus further bringing down the actual loan rates. First, the LPR reform was further promoted, and the guiding role of the LPR was brought into play. The PBC guided the one-year and above-five-year LPR to decrease by 0.1 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively, while it lowered the SLF rate by 0.1 percentage points. As a result, actual corporate loan rates remained stable with a slight decline, and corporate financing costs were lowered significantly. In June, the weighted average lending rate dropped by 0.52 percentage points year on year to 4.41 percent, and the weightedaverage interest rate on corporate loans fell by 0.42 percentage points to 4.16 percent. Second, the market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit rates was established, further promoting the market-oriented pricing of deposit rates. The monitoring of deposit rates was further strengthened, with deposit rate pricing behavior for agreement deposits and other deposit products further regulated, urging financial institutions to conduct agreement deposit businesses in compliance with the laws and regulations. Third, conversion of the domestic financial market benchmark rate from the LIBOR was actively promoted. Major domestic banks have already been prepared for the conversion of the pricing benchmark for businesses affected by the LIBOR expiration, while most of the new foreign-currency-denominated floating-rate businesses in domestic markets have switched their benchmark from the LIBOR to alternative benchmark rates. VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations, enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, while giving play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In H1 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the USD were 6.3014 and 6.7898, respectively. During the 117 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 58 days and depreciated on 59 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 1.1 percent (731 bps) and 1.0 percent (681 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate against major international currencies experienced both appreciations and depreciations, floating in both directions. At end-June, the central parity of the RMB against the dollar depreciated 5.0 percent from end-2021, while the central parities of the RMB against the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen appreciated 3.0 percent, 5.8 percent, and 12.8 percent, respectively, during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism that commenced in 2005 to end-June 2022, the RMB appreciated by a cumulative total of 23.3 percent, 42.9 percent, and 48.7 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of microeconomic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and investment.As of end-June, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and the foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB59.906 billion and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD381 million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions New achievements were made to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with total financial risks decreasing. Addressing the risks of high-risk groups was steadily advanced, risks associated with small and medium-sized banks were prevented and defused, and financial risks in key regions and areas were orderly mitigated. The results from the central bank rating of financial institutions in Q4 2021 indicated that, among the 4,398 banking financial institutions being rated throughout the nation, financial institutions within the safety boundary took up 93 percent of the total number and 99 percent of the total assets of all rated institutions, with central bank ratings for the overwhelming majority of small and medium-sized banks staying within the safety range. Meanwhile, the central bank rating of financial institutions in Q1 2022 has also been completed. The PBC strengthened risk monitoring andearly-warning on banks and it conducted stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions. In response to the emerging problems of banks with early warnings, the PBC made timely corrections to ensure early identification and resolution of risks. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scopes, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main businesses, and give full play to their roles in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthened risk prevention and control. X. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Stepping up facilitation for foreign exchange business. On April 18, the PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) jointly issued the Notice on Strengthening Financial Services for COVID-19 Containment and Socio-Economic Development to roll out a batch of foreign exchange supporting measures, such as expanding the policy for facilitating trade-related foreign exchange payments and receipts of quality enterprises nationwide, carrying out the pilot program on external debt facilitation quotas, allowing the sale and use of foreign currency–denominated loans that are domestically issued with an export trading background, and improving exchange-rate risk management services for enterprises. Supporting cross-border financing for high-tech enterprises and “specialized, sophisticated, distinctive, and innovative” companies. On May 31, the SAFE issued the Notice on Supporting High-tech Enterprises and SSDI (Specialized, Sophisticated, Distinctive, and Innovative) Companies for Carrying Out Pilot Programs to Facilitate Cross-border Financing. According to the Notice, the pilot programs will be expanded to facilitate independent overseas borrowing within a certain quota by more eligible enterprises, thus helping such enterprises to accelerate their innovation and development. First, more regions will be included, with the coverage expanding from specific areas in nine provinces and cities to the whole areas of seventeen provinces and cities; Second, more types of enterprises will be encompassed, with SSDI companies added in addition to high-tech enterprises. Third, the amount of overseas borrowing will be increased, and the facilitation quota of USD10 million will apply to all eligible enterprises, including high-tech enterprises and SSDI companies in nine provinces and cities that have already carried out the pilot programs.Enhancing the coverage and quality of facilitation policies for quality enterprises. The policy for facilitating trade-related foreign exchange payments and receipts of quality enterprises was expanded nationwide, with the four provinces and autonomous regions of Heilongjiang, Tibet, Ningxia, and Guizhou added in the second quarter. Trade-related foreign exchange settlements for quality enterprises now feature “application in seconds, and completion in minutes.” As of end-June, 202 banks have conducted 1.215 million business facilitations for 2,869 enterprises, with the amount totaling USD770.4 billion. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In H1 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates featured a downward movement, with transaction activities picking up. The scale of bond issuances rose year on year, with government bonds delivering notable results. Yield curves of government securities moved downward. The stock market rallied, with turnover increasing year on year. In the insurance industry, premium revenue declined year on year, while asset growth accelerated. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates witnessed a marked decline, with active market transactions In June 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 1.56 percent, and the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos posted 1.57 percent, 46 basis points, and 52 basis points lower than those in December 2021, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.44 percent, 13 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos in the interbank market. At end-June, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 1.90 percent and 2.20 percent, respectively, down 23 basis points and 7 basis points from end-December 2021, respectively. Market transactions were active. In H1 2022, the volume of bond repos trading on the interbank market reached RMB630 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB5.2 trillion, up 33.7 percent year on year. The volume of cumulative trading in interbank lending registered RMB67.3 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB551.5 billion and a year-on-year increase of 15.8 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 85.6 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2 percentage points year on year, and overnight lendingconstituted 88.3 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, down 0.9 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 23.4 percent year on year to RMB192.8 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposits (CDs) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In H1 2022, about 13,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB10.8 trillion. The total volume of trading on the secondary market registered RMB107.7 trillion. At end-June, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.7 trillion. The weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.25 percent, 2 basis points lower than that of the 3-month Shibor. In H1 2022, about 30,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB7.5 trillion, an increase of RMB1.3 trillion year on year.Interest rate swap transactions decreased. In H1 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 105,000 transactions, decreasing 25.7 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB8.4 trillion, a decrease of 24.1 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly, and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB5.5 trillion, accounting for 65.0 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 88.1 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In H1 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 488 transactions, with RMB75.46 billion of the notional principal.The interest rate options business developed at a steady pace. The LPR options business was officially launched on the interbank market in March 2020 and the fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29, 2021. In H1 2022, a total of 307 interest rate options transactions were concluded, totaling RMB41.07 billion. Specifically, six were interest rate swap transactions, amounting to RMB1.70 billion of the notional principal, and 301 were interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB39.37 billion of the notional principal. 2. The coupon rates of bonds generally declined, while bond issuances expanded with active trading of spot bonds Coupon rates of bonds generally declined. In June 2022, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.74 percent, 9 basis points lower than that in December 2021. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 2.95 percent, 7 basis points lower than the rate in December 2021. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.38 percent, 31 basis points higher than the rate in December 2021.The term spreads of government securities yields expanded. At end-June 2022, yields on 1-year and 3-year government securities decreased by 29 basis points and 1 basis point to 1.95 percent and 2.45 percent from end-December 2021, respectively; yields on 5-year, 7-year, and 10-year government securities increased by 4 basis points, 6 basis points, and 5 basis points to 2.65 percent, 2.84 percent, and 2.82 percent, respectively, from end-December 2021. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 87 basis points, expanding 34 basis points from end-December 2021. Bond issuances increased year on year. In H1 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 7 percent, or RMB2.1 trillion, year on year to RMB31.5 trillion, driven mostly by surges in government bonds and debt-financing instruments issued by non-financial institutions. At end-June 2022, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB141.7 trillion, representing an increase of 14.6 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed rapid growth. In H1 2022, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB144.1 trillion, registering an increase of 33.1 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank market was RMB124.3 trillion, representing an increase of 28.6 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB19.7 trillion, an increase of 71.4 percent year on year.3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market were basically stable The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In H1 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB14.1 trillion, rising 14.3 percent year on year. At end-H1, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB16.6 trillion, increasing by 16.0 percent year on year. At end-June, outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew by RMB1.6567 trillion and RMB882.1 billion compared to the beginning of 2022 and end-March, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 67.7 percent was issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In H1 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB28.9 trillion, growing 21.2 percent year on year. At end-June, the balance of bill financing was RMB12.0 trillion, up 39.4 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.8 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 1.2 percentage points year on year. The interest rates forbill financing first increased and then decreased, remaining generally stable. 4. The stock indices recovered while turnover expanded year on year The stock indices recovered. At end-June 2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,399 points, increasing by 4.5 percent from end-March. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 12,896 points, increasing by 6.4 percent from end-March. Turnover on the stock markets expanded year on year. In H1 2022, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB114.4 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB977.9 billion, representing an increase of 7.2 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets decreased year on year. In H1, a cumulative fund of RMB567.3 billion was raised, decreasing by 13.8 percent year on year. 5. Premium income decreased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In H1 2022, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB2.8 trillion, down 0.4 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.4 percentage points compared to that recorded in 2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB776.8 billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 1.5 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 1.4 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went up by 1.7 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-June 2022, total assets in the insurance sector increased 7.5 percent year on year to RMB26.6 trillion, an acceleration of 0.7 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 4.6 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 6 percent year on year.6. The turnover of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions remained generally stable In H1 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD3.8 trillion, a decrease of 23 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD9.8 trillion, an increase of 5.5 year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD6.5 trillion, accounting for 65.7 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD67.6 billion, rising 29.4 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD691.2 billion, increasing by 13.5 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 55.5 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, while prices went down At end-June 2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,817 per ounce, representing a decrease of 6.4 percent from end-March. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB391.7 per gram, decreasing by 0.6 percent from end-March. In Q2 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 9,699.98 tons, representing growth of 6.5 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB3.87 trillion, representing growth of 12 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market Institutional arrangements in the bond market were improved. In April 2022, the PBC and the CBIRC jointly released the Notice on the Issuance of Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Eligible Non-Capital Bonds by Global Systemically Important Banks (Yinfa No. 100 [2022]), which specified core elements and regulations for the issuance of total loss-absorbing capacity eligible non-capital bonds. The Notice provides the basis for the orderly issuance of the said bonds by global systemically important banks. The bond market was further opened up in a high-quality manner. In May 2022, the PBC, CSRC, and SAFE jointly released the Matters Concerning Further Facilitating Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Announcement No.4 [2022] of the PBC, CSRC, and SAFE). Based on the principle of “one set of rules, one bond market,” the Announcement further facilitates overseas institutional investments in China’s bond market by unifying and improving relevant policy requirements and cross-border fund supervision. 2. Reform and institutional arrangements in the securities marketFundamental institutional arrangements for the capital market were improved. On April 20, 2022, the 34th session of the 13th NPC Standing Committee passed the Futures and Derivative Law of the People's Republic of China, which came into force on August 1, 2022. Aiming at serving the real economy, forestalling and controlling financial risks, and deepening financial reform, the Law stipulates the basic rules for the futures and derivative markets in a comprehensive and systematic manner, thus filling the gaps in the legal framework of the capital market. The reform of the registration-based IPO system was pressed ahead in a stable manner. In April 2022, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on Improving Post-Delisting Supervision of Listed Companies, which improves the delisting mechanism of listed companies and helps create a sound environment for smooth market entry and exit. In May, the CSRC released the Provisions on Piloting the Business of Trading Stocks on the Sci-Tech Innovation Board by Securities Companies as Market Makers, which helps introducing the market maker mechanism to the sci-tech innovation board in a bid to improve stock liquidity and market resilience. In May, the CSRC revised and released the Guidelines for Due Diligence Work of Sponsors and the Guidelines for Working Papers on the Sponsor Business for Securities Issuances and Listings, aiming to further improve the quality of sponsors’ due diligence work as well as the working paper system of sponsor business. In May, the CSRC, MOJ, and MOF jointly released the Opinions on Strengthening the Supervision of the Cleanliness of Intermediaries under the Registration-based IPO System, for the purposes of regulating the cleanliness of intermediaries and their staff members, facilitating the cracking down on financial corruption along with the forestalling and controlling of financial risks, and safeguarding the reform of the registration-based IPO system. Judicial guarantees for the NEEQ were strengthened. In June 2022, the Supreme People’s Court released the Several Opinions on Providing Judicial Guarantees for Deepening the Reform of the NEEQ and the Establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange, which brings judicial functions into full play and provides strong judicial guarantees for investors to grow more comfortable with investing and for SMEs to be bold in blazing new trails and starting up businesses. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The investment of insurance funds was regulated. In April 2022, the CBIRC revised and released the Notice on the Investment of Insurance Funds in Relevant Financial Products. In the Notice, wealth management products of wealth management companies, single asset management plans, and debt-to-equity swap plans are included in the scope of investable financial products. It is also stipulated that insurance asset management companies shall undertake active management responsibilities, such as due diligence, investment decision-making, andpost-investment management. Furthermore, the requirement for look-through regulation was enhanced, investments in single asset management products were regulated, and requirements for post-investment management were improved. In May, the CBIRC revised and released the Rules on Entrusted Investments of Insurance Funds. The revised Rules delete the requirements on securities companies and fund management companies as investment managers, clarify the boundary between the principal-agent relationship and the trust relationship involved in insurance fund investment, and enrich the rights, responsibilities, obligations, and prohibited behavior by both trustors and trustees. The reform to standardize the insurance industry was advanced. In May 2022, the CBIRC released the 14th Five-Year Plan for the Standardization of China's Insurance Industry. It is proposed in the Plan that by 2025, China will have built a well-organized, comprehensive, and effective system for insurance standards, and it will have established more standards in areas of the insurance industry, such as core businesses, important services, and key technology. In terms of insurance standardization, China will build more exemplary institutions, raise greater awareness, and deepen international communications and cooperation. Related-party transactions in insurance fund investments were regulated. In May 2022, the CBIRC released the Notice on Strengthening Supervision of Related-Party Transactions in Insurance Institutions’ Fund Investments. The Notice specifies the basic principles, division of responsibilities, and prohibited behavior for related-party transactions in insurance fund investment, requires that insurance institutions strengthen the management of related parties, cooperative institutions, approval and decision-making processes, and information disclosures. It also clarifies the key points of supervision, enriches the supervisory measures, and gives full play to the role of industrial self-disciplinary organizations. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments As high inflation is becoming the greatest challenge to the global economy, the central banks in the major advanced economies are tightening monetary policy at a faster pace. This, coupled with intermittent outbreaks of COVID-19, rising geopolitical tensions, and energy and food crises, has weakened growth momentum in the global economy. Large swings in financial markets and the risks of a hard landing in some economies merit attention.1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies Economic growth momentum weakened. In the US, the gross domestic product (GDP) fell 0.9 percent at an annualized pace in the second quarter, the second straight quarterly decline. In June, the University of Michigan’s Consumer Sentiment Index dropped to a record low of 50, and the Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) fell to a two-year low of 53. In the euro area, the GDP grew 0.7 percent in the second quarter on a quarterly basis, higher than the growth of 0.5 percent in the first quarter. However, some leading indicators worsened. In June, the Consumer Confidence Index in the euro area fell to –23.8, the second lowest after the –24.4 in April 2020, while the manufacturing PMI hit a 22-month-low of 52.1. The Japanese economy contracted 0.5 percent on an annualized basis in the first quarter. In their latest reports, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank revised downward their global growth forecasts for this year, by 0.4 and 0.3 percentage points, to 3.2 percent and 2.9 percent, respectively. Inflation remained elevated. In June, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) was up by 9.1 percent in the US and by 9.4 percent in the UK compared with the previous year, both reaching a 40-year high. The Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the euro area rose by 8.6 percent over the prior year, also a new record high since the statistics became available. In the emerging markets, the CPI in India and South Africa both went up by more than 7 percent in June, the CPI in Russia and the IPCA in Brazil rose by over 10 percent, while the CPI in Argentina and Turkey surged by 64 percent and 78.6 percent, respectively. Structural supply shortages remained in the job markets, while growth of labor demand moderated. On the one hand, labor supply shortages remain a main problem in the major advanced economies. Job vacancies in the US hit 10.698 million in June, about 1.8 vacancies for each registered unemployed, exceeding 10 million for thirteen consecutive months. On the other hand, labor demand started to fall. The employment index, one component of the manufacturing PMI, was 49.6 in May, dropping below 50 for the first time in nearly nine months, and it fell further to 47.3 in June. As downward pressures on economic growth increase, firms are more reluctant to hire, which may push up the jobless rate from the current low levels. Going forward, labor supply shortages and weakening labor demand may continue to coexist in the major advanced economies for some time. Volatility increased in global financial markets. First, stock indices declined. At the end of June, the S&P 500 and the STOXX50 slumped over 20 percent from their peaks in January, technically entering a bear market. Second, the bond market was sluggish. In the first half of this year, the yield on 10-year government bonds in theUS, Germany, and the UK went up by 146, 165, and 127 basis points (bps), respectively, while the yield jumped higher on government bonds issued by the southern European countries with weak fiscal positions. Third, the foreign exchange market fluctuated sharply. The US dollar strengthened as monetary policies in the advanced economies diverged. In mid-July, the euro dropped below its parity against the US dollar several times, and the Japanese yen depreciated by more than 15 percent against the US dollar in the first half of 2022, both marking record lows in nearly twenty years. Fourth, the commodity market was volatile. The prices of energy, metals, and agricultural products soared in the wake of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, and most of them peaked in early March. Afterwards, energy prices fluctuated at high levels, while the prices of metals and agricultural products dropped noticeably. In particular, the prices of copper, aluminum, and zinc have already fallen back to their levels in the fourth quarter of 2021.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The major advanced economies quickened their pace of monetary policy tightening. The Federal Reserve (Fed) hiked the federal funds rate by 50 bps in May and by 75 bps in June and July to a target range of 2.25–2.5 percent, the biggest single rate hike since November 1994. In its June dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2022 was 3.25–3.5 percent, which means a total hike of 325 bps this year, higher than the forecast in the March dot plot. In addition, from June the Fed began reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, initially by USD30 billion and USD17.5 billion per month, respectively, which would then increase to USD60 billion and USD35 billion after three months. The European Central Bank increased the interest rate on its main refinancing operations, marginal lending facility, and deposit facility each by 50 bps in July, its first rate hike in eleven years and putting an end to eight years of negative interest rates. In the meantime, it created the Transmission Protection Instrument to ensure smooth transmission of monetary policy across the euro area so as to meet the price stability objective. The Bank of England (BOE) raised the Bank Rate in May and June, each by 25 bps to 1.25 percent. At its May meeting, the BOE’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) announced that it would consider beginning the process of selling UK government bonds. The Bank of Japan maintained a loose monetary policy. Among the other central banks, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Reserve Bank of Australia, and the Bank of Korea all raised rates twice in the second quarter, by a total of 100 bps, 100 bps, 75 bps, and 50 bps, respectively. Several emerging economies continued to raise interest rates. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the spillovers of monetary policy tightening in the advanced economies, some emerging economies continued with their rate hikes. In the second quarter, the central banks in Brazil, Mexico, India, and the Philippines all increased their rates twice by a total of 150 bps, 125 bps, 90 bps, and 50 bps, respectively, while the central banks in South Africa and Malaysia hiked their benchmark rates once, by 50 bps and 25 bps, respectively. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention High inflation has already become the biggest challenge facing the global economy. According to the IMF, the average annual growth of the global CPI was 3.9 percent for the first two decades of this century (from 2000 to 2019). The advanced economies experienced a great moderation and a period of low inflation when their annual CPI averaged only 1.8 percent. However, this trend changed in 2021 and was reversed this year, with clear signs of higher inflation. In the short term, factors contributing to higher inflation include the earlier massive stimuli by the advancedeconomies, the supply bottleneck exacerbated by the resurgence of COVID-19, global energy and food supply strains caused by geopolitical tensions, wage-price spirals amplified by the mismatch between demand and supply of labor, and the second-order effects of rising inflation expectations in overseas markets. In the medium and long term, dividends from global integration and abundant labor supply, which kept inflation subdued for the first two decades of this century, have been reversed. This, in tandem with the energy transition and the rising costs of industrial chain restructuring, will make inflation stay elevated longer than it was in previous episodes. The major advanced economies face a monetary policy dilemma, as their growth momentum has weakened. Energy supply strains in Europe and some other regions may add to the difficulties faced by firms and households and may weigh on an economic recovery. Global confirmed daily new cases of COVID-19 have gone up again since June, fueled by the Omicron BA.5 variant, creating new uncertainties for global economic prospects. High inflation has made the policy trade-off even more difficult for the central banks in the major advanced economies. A looser-than-warranted monetary policy is likely to trigger a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, while a tighter-than-warranted monetary policy will increase the risks of a hard landing. The emerging economies and the developing countries are facing the risk of a perfect storm: rising inflation, slower growth, debt overhang, currency depreciation, food crisis, and energy crisis. The World Bank projects the potential growth of the emerging economies and the developing countries for the next decade to be 0.6 percentage points lower than that in the pre-COVID-19 period. Meanwhile, less accommodative global financial conditions have increased the debt servicing burden on low-income countries. According to the IMF, more than 30 percent of the emerging economies and the developing countries are in or on the verge of debt difficulties. In the low-income countries, that percentage is 60 percent. Large swings in global financial markets and a persistent currency depreciation in the emerging economies may further trigger chain reactions, dealing a heavy blow to the financially vulnerable market entities. The Institute of International Finance estimates that the emerging markets saw a net capital outflow for four successive months, from March to June, with the total net outflow exceeding USD20 billion. In addition, food and energy security challenges loom large. According to the United Nations, nearly 800 million people worldwide are suffering from hunger, and the world is heading toward the worst food crisis since World War II. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In H1, due to the complicated and rapidly changing international environment andunexpected sporadic domestic outbreaks of the pandemic, China’s economy faced increasing downward pressures. Pandemic containment and economic and social development in all regions and departments across the country were coordinated in an effective way, with an emphasis on adjustment of the macro policies. As positive results have been achieved in pandemic containment, a series of measures to stabilize growth has delivered results, which buttress stable performance of the economy with good momentum. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in H1 grew by 2.5 percent year on year to RMB56.2642 trillion on a comparable basis. Specifically, GDP in Q2 achieved positive growth and grew by 0.4 percent year on year. 1. The consumption margin improved, investments continued to increase, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth The income of residents grew steadily, and the improved pandemic situation promoted the recovery of consumption. In H1, China’s per capita disposable income reached RMB18463, increasing by 4.7 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 3.0 percent in real terms. The income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents, and the structure of income distribution continuously improved. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q2, 23.8 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” up 0.1 percentage points from Q1. In H1, total retail sales of consumer goods decreased by 0.7 percent year on year, mainly due to the 11.1 percent year-on-year decline in April that was affected by the pandemic. The decline narrowed to 6.7 percent year on year in May and the year-on-year growth rate in June changed from negative to positive, which was 3.1 percent year on year. Investments continued to increase, buttressing the steady growth of the economy. In H1, total fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households) increased by 6.1 percent year on year. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 10.4 percent, 4.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure increased by 7.1 percent, 1.0 percentage point higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in real estate decreased by 5.4 percent. Investments in the high-tech industry saw sound growth and grew by 20.2 percent year on year, 14.1 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Social investments grew rapidly, with a growth rate of 14.9 percent year on year in H1. Specifically, investments in health and education grew by 34.5 percent and 10.0 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports recorded rapid growth. In H1, imports and exports of goods grew by 9.4 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 13.2 percent year on year and imports grew by 4.8 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods posting RMB2.4812 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share ofimports and exports under general trade increasing by 2.1 percentage points year on year and the share of private enterprises increasing by 1.9 percentage points year on year. Our trading partners are becoming more diversified. Imports and exports to the countries along the Belt and Road and to the RCEP (Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership) trading partners grew by 17.8 percent and 5.6 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In H1, actually utilized FDI increased by 17.4 percent year on year to RMB723.31 billion (equivalent to USD112.35 billion, growing by 21.8 percent year on year, excluding investments in banking, securities, and the insurance industry). In terms of sectors, FDI in the high-tech industry and the services industry grew rapidly. In H1, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 33.6 percent year on year. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 34.4 percent year on year and actually utilized FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 31.1 percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the services industry grew by 9.2 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production was generally stable, industrial production grew rapidly, and the service industry continued to recover In H1, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in the national economy grew by 5.0 percent, 3.2 percent, and 1.8 percent year on year, respectively. In Q2, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 4.4 percent, 0.9 percent, and -0.4 percent year on year, respectively. China saw another bumper grain harvest this summer, and animal husbandry grew steadily. The output of summer grains totaled 147.39 million tons, up 1.434 million tons from 2021, increasing by 1.0 percent year on year. The sowing area of autumn grains increased steadily. In H1, the output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 5.3 percent year on year, and the output of pork specifically grew by 8.2 percent year on year. Production expectations of farmers improved gradually and hogs in stock increased quarter on quarter. At end-June, the number of hogs in stock totaled 430.57 million, up 1.9 percent from Q1. Industrial production recovered steadily. In H1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 3.4 percent year on year. The leading role of new driving forces was enhanced. In H1, the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector increased by 9.6 percent, which was 6.2 percentage points higher than that of the IEDS. Recovery of the industrial chain and the supply chain was accelerated. The value-added of the automobile manufacturing sector increased significantly by 16.2 percent year on year in June. The profits of industrialenterprises recovered quickly. Total profits of the IEDS decreased by 6.5 percent year on year in May and increased by 0.8 percent year on year in June, changing from a decline to an increase. Among the 41 major industrial categories, 21 industries saw year-on-year profit growth, and the number of industries seeing growth accounted for 51.2 percent of all 41 industries. Growth in the services industry recovered gradually. In H1, the value-added of the services industry grew by 1.8 percent year on year. The Index of Service Production (ISP) decreased by 6.1 percent and 5.1 percent year on year in April and May, respectively, and the year-on-year growth rate turned positive and registered 1.3 percent in June. The new business forms of the services industry grew rapidly. In H1, online retail sales of commodities increased by 5.6 percent year on year, with the share of total retail sales of social consumer goods increasing by 2.2 percentage points year on year. Expectations of enterprises improved. In June, the Business Activities Index for the services industry reached 54.3 percent; specifically, the Business Activities Index of retail sales, railway transport, air transport, postal services, monetary and financial services, and capital market services were all within a prosperous range above 55 percent. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and the growth of producer prices continued to decelerate Consumer prices increased moderately. In H1, the CPI increased by 1.7 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.6 percentage points from Q1. Specifically, the CPI in April, May, and June increased by 2.1 percent, 2.1 percent, and 2.5 percent year on year, respectively, and the core CPI (food and energy excluded) increased by 1 percent year on year. Driven by the increase in international energy prices, the increases in prices of domestic gasoline and diesel accelerated by 3.6 percentage points and 3.8 percentage points from Q1, respectively. With the start of a new Hog Circle, pork prices have tended to rise since late April. The growth of producer prices continued to decelerate. In H1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 7.7 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1 percentage point from Q1. Due to the influence of enhanced policies to ensure supplies and stabilize prices and the base effect, the year-on-year growth of the PPI continued to decelerate from 9.1 percent in January to 6.1 percent in June. In H1, the Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by 10.4 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.9 percentage points from Q1. The Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC posted a cumulative year-on-year increase of 5.9 percent, 0.3 percentage points lower than that in Q1.Box 4 Annual Price Target Still Achievable, with Vigilance against Structural Inflation Pressures Elevated global inflation has recently been persistent, with the major developed economies in particular facing high inflation pressures that have been unprecedented for decades. In June, the CPI in the US climbed 9.1 percent from the previous year, setting a 40-year record high, and the HICP in the euro area surged 8.6 percent from the previous year, the highest since data have become available. Macro policies were caught between maintaining stable growth and countering inflation. This predicament was closely related to the actions taken by the central banks in the developed economies whereby they previously misjudged inflation developments and their policy adjustments fell behind market curves, which also offered inspiration and references for China’s macro management. It should be noted that preserving currency stability is the top priority of the central bank and maintaining stable inflation both underpins a stable macro economy and promotes sustained and steady economic growth. At any time, the central bank should be highly concerned about marginal changes in price trends, make broad-based considerations, analyze and judge future inflation developments objectively, and be ready for all sorts of policy-arrangement possibilities. On the one hand, in terms of economic fundamentals, China has favorable conditions to keep prices generally stable. China’s inflation trends have generally been moderate and stable over the previous months. Compared with the same period of the last year, the cumulative increase in the CPI from January to June registered 1.7 percent, and growth of the PPI eased every month. Domestic prices have remained stable amid unusually high worldwide inflation. It is expected that this year’s price increases will remain within a reasonable range, achieving the annual target of an average CPI increase of about 3 percent. This achievement does not come easily. Under the unified arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council to keep supply and prices of grains and energy stable, domestic prices were effectively shielded from the pass-through shocks of the global price hikes of major commodities and grains, and we refrained from adopting a deluge of strong stimulus policies and providing an excessive money supply, thus laying a solid foundation for price stability. Fundamentally, China is a major producer, its monetary policy remains sound and prudent, its aggregate supply and demand is broadly balanced, and it enjoys high grain self-sufficiency, with another bumper summer harvest and a record high level of grain output. In addition, domestic prices of coal and clean energies correlate weakly with international markets, domestic industrial and supply chains function smoothly, and household inflation expectations remain stable. Healthy, virtuous, and resilient economic fundamentals are helpful for price increases to broadly remain within a reasonable range over the medium and long term. On the other hand, we should be mindful that structural inflation pressures maygo up, imported inflationary pressures still exist, and a possible resurgence of price hikes driven by the interlacing of various factors are not problems we should take lightly. Externally, dividends, such as globalization and sufficient labor supply, that played important roles in stemming global inflation over the past two decades have been reversed amid higher costs of the transitions to cleaner, greener energy and industrial chain restructuring, thus pivotal global inflation picked up notably. Unexpected negative factors, such as renewed COVID-19 outbreaks, unusual climate changes, and geopolitical conflicts, may also intensify the uncertainties of supply and demand disruptions and price fluctuations, with the external environment witnessing fundamental changes. Domestically, a combination of various factors may fuel the temporary pick-up of a pivotal inflation rate. First, future consumption recovery following successful COVID-19 containment may drive a faster pass-through of previous PPI increases to CPI. Over the first six months, among the categories of the PPI basket, increases in production materials began falling from 11.8 percent to 7.5 percent in June, while living materials began growing from 0.8 percent to 1.7 percent, an evident pass-through to downstream industries. This growth was mainly fueled by the recovery of consumption demand, and higher total factor productivity can only partially offset inflation pressures. In practice, the most recent round of accelerated CPI pick-up in the US started after March 2021 when consumption demand recovered at a faster pace. Second, the CPI basket in China is more dependent on food, pork prices in particular. A new round of a “pork cycle” has already started, which may fuel higher food categories in the CPI basket. China has experienced roughly four rounds of a “pork cycle” since 2006, with each round lasting about four years and the first 1.5 to 2 years seeing price increases. Domestic pork prices dropped to the weak levels of the current stage in April, when about four years had passed since the previous cycle had started in around May 2018. Pork prices edged up in late April, and its price increases accelerated in the second half of June, with the slope of the upward curve steepening. Average wholesale prices soared more than 40 percent over the month from June 16 to July 15, indicating the beginning of another round of a “pork cycle.” Comparatively, due to our generally sufficient hog supply in the current stage, this round of pork price increases is likely to be more moderate than that during the swine fever period in 2019. But the price increases have also had upward effects on the CPI. Third, China’s dependence on imported oil, gas, and other energy resources is relatively high, and the soaring costs of imported energy have finally resulted in broader-based product price increases from domestic transport and travel for end-users. Brent crude-oil futures fluctuated between high absolute levels of 90 to 115 dollars per barrel since the second half of 2022, and from January to July the average price gains registered over 50 percent on a yearly basis. Affected by this, the average price of No. 92 gasoline in the first seven months grew 25.3 percent from the previous year, and the transportation and communication category in the CPI basket added 6.3 percent from the previous year, 4.5 percentage points higher than the overall CPI increase, thus pointing to the ongoing imported inflationary pressures. On balance, China’s pivotal CPI in the second half of the year is expected to move upward compared with the rate of 1.7 percent in the first half of the year, and theincrease in certain months may temporarily exceed 3 percent, as structural inflationary pressures grow. For the next stage, we will continue to pursue sound and prudent monetary policies, refrain from adopting a deluge of strong stimulus policies and providing an excessive money supply, and take a holistic approach to maintain stable growth, stable employment, and stable prices. On the one hand, we will make continuous efforts to lay solid foundations for a favorable environment whereby domestic grain production increases, while maintaining stability and smooth energy market functions, closely monitoring inflation developments both at home and abroad, and responding to them properly; On the other hand, we will continue to maintain a proper and adequate level of liquidity supply, ramp up support to the real economy, see that increases in money supply and aggregate financing are proper, and strive for the best possible economic development outcomes in 2022. 4. Fiscal revenue stabilized and rebounded, and the effects of support for stabilizing the economy and ensuring the people’s livelihood have emerged In H1, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB10.5 trillion, increasing by 3.3 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), and decreasing by 10.2 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 1.7 percent and 4.7 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), respectively, and decreased by 12.7 percent and 7.9 percent (calculated on a natural basis), respectively. Tax revenue posted RMB8.6 trillion, increasing by 0.9 percent (VAT credit refund excluded). In H1, expenditures in the national general budget posted RMB12.9 trillion, increasing by 5.9 percent and accelerating by 1.4 percentage points from the same period of the previous year. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures related to science and technology, transportation, and agriculture/forestry/water resource projects grew quickly, registering year-on-year growth of 17.3 percent, 12 percent, and 11 percent, respectively. 5. The employment situation improved slightly The surveyed urban unemployment rate fell. In H1, 6.54 million people were newly employed, and the surveyed unemployment rate averaged 5.7 percent. Specifically, the surveyed unemployment rate in April was 6.1 percent, and it was reduced to 5.9 percent and 5.5 percent in May and June, respectively. In June, the surveyed urban unemployment rate in thirty-one major cities was 5.8 percent, decreasing by 1.1 percentage points month on month. In June, the average weekly working hours of employees in enterprises were 47.7 hours, 0.5 hours more than in May. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in China’s balance of payments. According topreliminary statistics, in H1 2022 China’s current account surplus registered USD169.1 billion, accounting for 1.9 percent of GDP, continuously staying within a reasonable range. Specifically, according to the balance of payments statistics, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD320.7 billion, an increase of 36 percent year on year. The growth rate reached a new high. Trade in services recorded a deficit of USD37.8 billion, down 30 percent year on year. A basic equilibrium was maintained in cross-border capital flows. Specifically, direct investments recorded a surplus of USD74.9 billion. At end-June 2022, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.0713 trillion, down USD178.9 billion from that at end-2021, mainly due to the increase in the US dollar index and the decline in the prices of financial assets in the major countries. By the end of March, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.7102 trillion, and medium- and long-term foreign debt accounted for 47 percent of all foreign debt. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In June 2022, among seventy medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 1.3 percent and 2.7 percent year on year, respectively. In H1 2022, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 22.2 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 28.9 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development fell by 5.4 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development fell by 4.5 percent year on year.At end-June 2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 4.2 percent year on year to RMB53.1 trillion. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 6.2percent year on year to RMB38.9 trillion. Outstanding housing development loans dropped by 1.4 percent year on year to RMB9.4 trillion. 7.2 The electronic information industry The electronic information industry is a strategic, fundamental, and leading pillar of the national economy, covering such areas as electronic information manufacturing and software and information technology services. In H1 2022, faced with multiple challenges brought about by factors including the complicated and serious international situation and the sporadic COVID-19 outbreaks at home, China’s electronic information industry demonstrated strong resilience with faster development in new driving forces. The growth rate of production picked up at a quicker pace, as manifested by the 10.2 percent year-on-year growth of the added value of electronic information manufacturing above a designated size in H1 2022, which is 6.8 percentage points higher than the growth of total added value of industries above a designated size. Investment in the industry kept ahead, as shown in the 19.9 percent year-on-year growth of fixed asset investments in electronic information manufacturing above a designated size in H1 2022, which is 9.5 percentage points higher than the overall investment in manufacturing. However, we must remain aware that the electronic information industry still faces many challenges, such as threats to the safety of industrial and supply chains, intensified competition, and the relocation of the industry abroad. First, it is urgent that we enhance the stability of industrial and supply chains. Electronic information is a typical global and technology-intensive industry. China’s weaker position in the global value chain and weak links in areas such as high-end chips and basic materials result in the problem of being “strangled.” Second, the transformation and upgrading of the industry is slow and the efficiency of the industry needs to be improved. In H1 2022, the operating revenue of electronic information manufacturing above a designated size grew by 7.7 percent year on year, while total profits shrank by 6.6 percent, with the operating profit margin posting 1.9 percentage points 1 lower than the average level of all industries. Third, the relocation of the industry abroad has accelerated. The sporadic outbreaks of COVID-19 at home, coupled with the bottleneck of international logistics and intensified geopolitical tensions, has brought new challenges to the global electronic information industrial chain in terms of its division of labor and layout. China has witnessed an accelerated relocation of such industry abroad, which is inevitable for the transformation and upgrading of its industrial structure as it is an objective law in global industrial relocation and factor endowment change for low value-added industrial chains to relocate to low-cost regions.Moving forward, the innovation-driven strategy will be continued to better safeguard industrial and supply chains, so as to ensure stable operation of the electronic information industry. First, research platforms for fundamental innovation will be enhanced at the national level, so as to take a long-term view in planning fundamental research, quicken the pace of independent innovation, and strengthen the foundation for the industry’s development. Second, more efforts will be made to build, improve, and upgrade the supply chain system, in order to create a gathering effect and a chain effect around the needs of leading and platform companies for production and supplementary services. Third, the opening-up will continue unswervingly to create new dynamics for international science and technology communications and cooperation, improve the image and influence of China’s electronic information industry, and relieve the stresses imposed by the relocation of industrial chains abroad. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy In Q2, the Chinese economy achieved positive growth under heavy pressures. In H1 2022, China’s GDP grew by 2.5 percent year on year. From March to April, downward pressures on the Chinese economy increased, due to internal and external factors exceeding expectations. From May to June, as positive results were achieved in prevention and control of COVID-19, relevant authorities accelerated implementation of a package of policy measures rolled out by the State Council to stabilize the economy, and ramped up efforts to implement fiscal, monetary, and industrial policies. The efforts stabilized the fundamentals of economic and social development to the greatest extent possible. In Q2, GDP registered year-on-year growth of 0.4 percent, and overall economic performance witnessed a stable recovery. Agricultural production was favorable and summer grain production saw a bumper harvest. Industrial production was in a steady recovery, and logistics and transportation gradually became smooth. The issuance and use of special local government bonds accelerated, and investment in infrastructure was speeded up. The momentum for transformation and upgrading continued. In H1 2022, the proportion of the value-added of the manufacturing sector in GDP was 0.7 percentage points higher than that in H1 2021, and the driving force of some key industries such as automobiles and electronics was enhanced. Employment and the people’s livelihood were guaranteed, and the urban surveyed unemployment rate declined for two consecutive months in May and June after a temporary rise. Green transformation was continuously promoted, and the proportion of clean energy consumption increased steadily. Imports and exports grew rapidly. An equilibrium was maintained in thebalance of payments, and foreign exchange reserves remained stable above USD3 trillion. At present, globally, with slower economic growth, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical tensions, the external environment has become more severe and complicated, while domestically, the foundation for economic recovery has yet to be strengthened. On the one hand, the pre-pandemic situation of “low inflation, low interest rates, low growth, and high debt” in the global economy is undergoing a fundamental transformation. In particular, high inflation is becoming the biggest challenge facing most economies. To control high inflation, the major developed economies have accelerated tightening of monetary policy, and the spillover effects on the emerging economies through foreign trade and investment, exchange rate fluctuations, and financial markets have increased significantly. Global economic growth is slowing down and the risks of a hard landing faced by some economies have increased. On the other hand, the recovery of domestic consumption is facing challenges, such as sluggish residential income growth, impaired balance sheets, and limited consumption scenarios, and there are still some difficulties and obstacles in actively expanding effective investment. The foundation for the recovery of the service sector is still not solid, young people face great employment pressures, and hard work is still needed to stabilize the economy. However, it should be noted that the fundamentals for China’s sound economic growth over the long run remain unchanged. The economy remains highly resilient, and there are abundant macro policy adjustment tools and favorable conditions for promoting high-quality economic development. We should maintain strategic focus, comprehensively implement the requirements for “preventing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and ensuring safe development,” coordinate pandemic containment and socio-economic development, ensure that a package of policy measures to stabilize the economy will deliver results, and stand firm in contributing to the stability of the national economy. Prices will remain generally stable throughout the year, but we should be alert to structural inflationary pressures. In Q2, pork prices bottomed out and the price of production materials fluctuated downwards. In H1 2022, the CPI increased by 1.7 percent year on year. Specifically, the CPI rose by 2.5 percent year on year in June. The PPI increased by 7.7 percent year on year in H1 2022. Specifically, the PPI rose by 6.1 percent year on year in June. In general, the Chinese economy is gradually recovering with a basically stable supply-demand relationship and moderate monetary conditions. Under the favorable conditions of stable and increased grain output and the smooth functioning of energy markets, it is expected that price hikes will remain within a reasonable range, the expected target of an annual average CPI growth of around 3 percent will be achieved, and PPI growth will continue its downward trend throughout the year. Going forward, as consumer demand recovers and transmission of the PPI to the CPI lags, a new cycle of pork price hike begins, and energy and rawmaterial costs are still at a high level, domestic structural inflationary pressures may increase, and imported inflationary pressures will still exist. It is expected that the growth of CPI will accelerate slightly in H2 2022, the CPI pivot will rise compared with that in H1 2022, and its growth in some months may temporarily exceed 3 percent. We should keep a close eye on price movements, strengthen monitoring and analysis, and be alert to any rebound of inflationary pressures. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will follow the guidelines of the 19th CPC National Congress, the plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, and the Central Economic Work Conference, as well as the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. Following the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will pursue progress while ensuring stability and it will take stability as its top priority. Applying the new development philosophy fully, faithfully, and comprehensively, it will speed up the building of a new development paradigm. It will deepen the supply-side structural reform, develop a modern central banking system, and improve the framework for a modern monetary policy. In addition, the PBC will ensure solid implementation of policies and measures to consolidate the economic rebound. It will work to stabilize employment and prices and it will give effective investment a key role so as to keep the economic indicators within a reasonable range. It will strive for the best possible outcome and do its part to set the stage for the upcoming 20th CPC National Congress. The PBC will strengthen implementation of the sound monetary policy and give play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure. It will take proactive measures to boost confidence. With proper intertemporal adjustments, it will balance short-term and long-term perspectives, economic growth and price stability, as well as internal and external equilibria. It will resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies and there will be no excessive money supply. With these efforts, it will provide stronger and higher-quality support for the real economy. While keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, the PBC will encourage greater credit support for businesses. With policy-based and developmental financial instruments in place, key support will be directed toward infrastructure construction. Meanwhile, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE). The aim is to achieve the best possible economic performance. Keeping a close watch on inflationary situations at home and abroad, the PBC will work to consolidate favorable conditions for stable and growing grain production and for smoothfunctioning of the energy market at home. With proper preparations and management, it will keep prices basically stable. Structural monetary policy tools will play a supportive role so that more support will be provided for inclusive MSB loans and for stable employment in micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises. The PBC will make good use of the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) as well as central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use, for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for transportation and logistics. More financial resources will be channeled to key areas, weak links, as well as to those businesses and industries that have been hard hit by COVID-19, and new economic growth points will be cultivated. The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and will optimize the central bank policy rate system. While enhancing regulation over deposit rates, it will ensure that the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates will play an important role and will contribute to stabilizing the liability costs for banks. The overall financing costs for businesses are expected to drop, with the LPR reform continuing to unleash its potential and playing a guiding role. The PBC will pay close attention to economic developments in the developed economies as well as to the spillover effects of their monetary policy shifts, and it will focus on domestic issues while properly balancing internal and external equilibria. Pursuing a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, the PBC will maintain bottom-line thinking and strengthen macro-prudential management for cross-border capital flows so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Following market principles and the rule of law, it will coordinate efforts for economic development and risk prevention, keep the financial system generally stable, and firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. First, the PBC will maintain stable and appropriate growth in money and credit. By using a mix of monetary policy tools, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and maintain reasonable growth in money supply and the AFRE, striving to achieve the best possible economic performance. Closely following the development of a number of uncertainties at home and abroad, it will conduct in-depth analyses of liquidity supply and demand in the banking system to improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of its operations. It will stabilize market expectations while properly balancing internal and external equilibria. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, continue to ease liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on bank credit supply, and guide financial institutions to step up credit support for the real economy in line with market-oriented and prudential management principles. Development and policy banks will be guided to put into use the newly increased RMB800 billion quota of credit and the newly launched financial instruments worth RMB300 billion in order togive strong support to infrastructure projects. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment by replenishing capital for commercial banks through multiple channels and ramping up support for small and medium-sized banks in their issuance of perpetual bonds and other capital replenishment instruments, thereby improving the capacity of banks to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will use structural monetary policy tools in a focused, reasonable, appropriate, and flexible manner in order to prioritize financial support for key fields and weak links. It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable to carry on inclusive and sustained funding support for agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private businesses. It will intensify financial support for MSBs and push for better implementation of the inclusive MSB lending facility so that it can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and securing employment. At the same time, the PBC will put into operation the CERF and the special central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use. It will encourage eligible financial institutions to lend at preferential interest rates to key projects that significantly reduce carbon emissions, and it will guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development based on market principles. Moreover, the PBC will support clean and efficient use of coal and coal-fired power. It will promote the transition to a green and low-carbon economy on the basis of the security of energy supply so as to help achieve the goals of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality with scientific and well-ordered steps. The PBC will also pick up pace in implementing the special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for transportation and logistics. These efforts are aimed at encouraging financial institutions to provide funding support for such fields in line with market principles and leveraging the role of structural monetary policy tools in providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. More work will be done to concretely implement the financial policies already introduced. The PBC will make efforts to implement the package of policy measures to stabilize the economy; it will encourage the deferral of interest and principal payments for loans issued to MSMEs, self-employed traders, and cargo drivers; it will continue pushing financial institutions to implement the 23 measures providing financial support for COVID-19 control as well as economic and social development and the policies supporting the recovery of the hard-hit industries in the services sector; and it will improve and facilitate the access of MSMEs to financing. Financial institutions will be guided to accelerate their implementation of the Notice on Promoting the Establishment of Long-Term Mechanisms for Boosting Financial Sector’s Confidence, Willingness, Capability, andExpertise in Lending to Micro and Small Businesses so that they will be more willing and able to provide services for MSBs and will do it more sustainably. The PBC will continue to assess the effectiveness of the MSB credit policy orientation and enhance the application of the assessment results. Focusing on the priorities for rural revitalization, it will guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, promote innovations of financial products and services, and effectively ramp up financial support for the agricultural sector, rural areas, and farmers. The newly launched policy-based and developmental financial instruments worth RMB300 billion will be properly used in accordance with the laws and regulations, while the newly increased RMB800 billion quota of credit for development and policy banks will be put into use in a timely manner. At the same time, commercial banks and social resources will be guided to provide follow-up funding support. With these efforts, infrastructure development and other key projects are expected to deliver concrete progress soon to play a positive role in stabilizing investment. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will adopt city-specific measures and use the policy toolkit fully and effectively to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions. Meanwhile, it will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance and promote the healthy development of the real estate market to foster a virtuous circle. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms, and it will focus on domestic conditions while balancing internal and external equilibria. It will continue to improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and the central bank policy rate system. It will strengthen the regulation of deposit rates, put in place a mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments, and give full play to the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rate pricing to stabilize bank liability costs. Moreover, it will tap into the LPR reform and leverage the guiding role of the LPR to help bring down the overall financing costs for businesses. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, and it will enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate. It will strengthen expectation management and uphold bottom-line thinking while conducting monitoring and analysis of cross-border capital flows and stressing risk prevention. By doing so, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and give play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. In addition, the PBC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market.Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for MSMEs with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept and on reducing the costs of risk hedging for enterprises, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. Meanwhile, the PBC will continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by further expanding use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepening international monetary cooperation, and promoting the sound and orderly development of offshore RMB markets. It will further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account. Fifth, the PBC will make continued efforts to deepen financial reform, and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. The reform of development and policy financial institutions will move ahead, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities so as to better play their roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBC will continue to build the legal system for the bond market and consolidate the legal basis for corporate credit bonds. It will also enhance the efficiency and interconnectivity of the multi-tiered bond market system and accelerate development of the commercial bank over-the-counter (OTC) bond market to improve bond market liquidity and to give rise to secondary market prices that are more consistent and effective. Moreover, the PBC will boost innovation in the bond market to intensify support for key fields and weak links, and it will improve the quality and efficiency of the services provided by the bond market to support the real economy. It will strengthen regulation of the bond market. Based on market principles and the rule of law, it will continue to adopt a zero-tolerance approach by stepping up efforts to crack down on illegal and irregular conduct in the bond market, and it will forestall and defuse bond market risks in a timely manner. At the same time, the PBC will remain firmly committed to advancing the opening-up of the bond market. Sixth, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential policy framework as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning and to enrich the macro-prudential policy tools. The PBC will improve the regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will push systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. At the same time, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve theirtotal loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention abilities. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate financial holding companies. Work will move ahead steadily to implement the requirement that non-financial enterprises which fall under the prescribed circumstances should apply for the establishment of financial holding companies according to the law. And the PBC will continue to enhance the relevant rules and regulations to promote the sound, well-regulated, and sustainable development of financial holding companies. Furthermore, it will strengthen the financial legal system. With the drafting of the Law on Financial Stability and the establishment of the Financial Stability Fund, it will further streamline and improve the long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution, aiming to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is based on market principles and the rule of law. The PBC will keep a close watch on risks in key fields and enhance the foresightedness, timeliness, and effectiveness of risk identification. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it will attach importance to preventing and defusing financial risks in order to reduce existing risks and strictly guard against emerging risks. Additionally, the PBC will further tap into the functions of deposit insurance for early corrections and risk resolution, leverage the role of risk-differentiated premiums as both incentives and restraints, and enhance the authority of early corrections. Continued efforts will be made to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement the corresponding measures. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards. It will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur.
Part 1 Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2022, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and has implemented the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. The PBC has placed stable growth in a more prominent position and it has strengthened implementation of a sound monetary policy. It has also given full play to the guiding roles of structural monetary policy instruments. Money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) have witnessed reasonable growth, the credit structure has been improved continuously, and overall financing costs have steadily declined, providing vigorous support for stabilizing the macro economy. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has adopted a monetary policy that prioritizes stability while pursuing development, and it has taken prompt measures at an early stage based on changes in the macro situation. It has employed a mix of instruments, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs), and it has turned over its profits to the Central Treasury, thus injecting liquidity into the market. It has also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner, kept liquidity in the banking system adequate at a reasonable level, and brought down interest rates in the money market, creating a favorable liquidity environment for stabilizing the macro economy and keeping economic performance within a reasonable range. At end-September 2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.5 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew rapidly, and lending rates remained at historic lows Credit support for the real economy was strengthened. Since the beginning of Q2, due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the downward pressures on the economy, enterprises, especially micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), have been faced with increasing difficulties in business operations. For a period of time, their demands for credit have been waning and the growth of loans has slowed down. In response, the PBC has successively held a number of symposia to analyze the monetary and credit situations, participated by heads of major financial institutions, the PBC branches at various levels and its affiliated institutions, as well as the policy banks. Financial institutions were encouraged to increase lending based on prudent operations and in line with market-based principles. In Q3, loans continued to accelerate, with newly issued loans registering RMB4.4 and a year-on-year increase of RMB445.6 billion, which revealed continuously enhanced support for the real economy. At end-September, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 10.7 percent year on year to RMB216.6 trillion, an increase of RMB18.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB890.9 billion. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 11.2 percent year on year to RMB210.8 trillion, up RMB18.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion.The credit structure continued to improve. At end-September, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB8.7 trillion as compared to those at the beginning of 2022, accounting for 59.8 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year (YOY) growth of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 30.8 percent, 19.6 percentage points higher than the YOY growth of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 24.6 percent year on year, 13.4 percentage points higher than the growth of total loans; 53.89 million MSBs were supported, a rise of 31.7 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rate of loans hit a statistical low. The PBC continuously deepened the market-oriented reform of interest rates, bringing into play the efficiency of the LPR reform and the key role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates. In mid-September, some national banks took the initiative to lower lending rates, with other banks following suit, which stabilized the liability costs for banks and brought about a further decline in actual lending rates. In September, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.65 percent and 4.30 percent, respectively, down 0.15 percentage points and 0.35 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. In September, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.34 percent, down 0.66 percentage points year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.65 percent, down 0.65 percentage points year on year, while the weighted average interest rate on corporate lending fell by 0.59 percentage points year on year to 4.00 percent. On the whole, interest rates on RMB-denominated loans witnessed a further decline, manifesting robust financial support for the real economy.In September, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 60.75 percent, 5.22 percent, and 34.03 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In September, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 0.60 percent and 2.59 percent, respectively, up 0.50 percentage points and 2.28 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six monthsregistered 3.64 percent and 3.78 percent, up 2.53 and 2.67 percentage points from December 2021, respectively.The growth of deposits picked up steadily. At end-September, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies at all financial institutions increased 10.9 percent year on year to RMB261.3 trillion, up RMB22.7 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB5.5 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 11.3 percent year on year to RMB255.0 trillion, an increase of RMB22.8 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB6.2 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD884.9 billion, a decrease of USD112.1 billion from the beginning of 2022 and a year-on-year deceleration of USD215.5 billion.Box 1 A Proper Assessment of the Widening Deposit–Loan Gap The deposit–loan gap refers to the gap between deposits and loans. As banks increase their holdings of bonds, foreign exchange, equities, and other assets, the share of loans in total assets is on the decline, resulting in a growing deposit–loan gap in China’s banking system. Since the beginning of 2022, the deposit–loan gap in the banking system has widened by a large margin. In the first three quarters of 2022, RMB loans and deposits increased by RMB18.1 trillion and RMB22.8 trillion, respectively. At end-September, the gap between outstanding deposits and outstanding loans was RMB44.2 trillion, up RMB4.7 trillion from end-2021, thus attracting some attention. Some attribute this to the conversion of savings into investments, arguing that the banks’ granting of more loans could narrow the gap. Yet we need to get to the core of the issue and make a proper assessment. In theory, under the current system of credit money, deposits, which are bank liabilities, are created during the process of asset expansion, including the issuance of loans. Instead of resorting to household savings, banks could simply expand assets to grant loans and create deposits (liabilities) at the same time. If they have no other assets than loans and no other liabilities than deposits, then the increase in loans will be accompanied by the same amount of new deposits without any gap between the two. The deposit-loan gap can be explained by the diversified financial support for thereal economy. Apart from loans, banks can also expand assets through the holding of bonds, funds outstanding for foreign exchange and equities, and making other investments. As a result, they can create deposits without scaling up loans. In other words, the widening deposit–loan gap is an outcome of diversifying money creation out of loans. Therefore, the gap cannot be explained by the conversion of savings into investments and thus encouraging banks to increase loans will not help. China is a case in point, where the expansion of the deposit–loan gap reflects macro-policy coordination in support of the real economy. Since the beginning of this year, unexpected factors have tempered credit demand in some sectors of the economy, while pushing up precautionary demand for money in certain circulation links. Shoring up the economy requires stronger monetary support. According to the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, monetary, fiscal, industrial, and other macro policies have formed a synergy, creating more money through channels other than loans. As a result, the deposit–loan gap has widened. First, fiscal departments have increased the issuance of bonds. In the first three quarters of 2022, the cumulative issuance of government bonds totaled RMB5.9 trillion, among which RMB4.7 trillion was held by banks as on-balance-sheet assets. The funds raised were spent by fiscal departments, which were then translated into enterprise and household deposits, thus widening the deposit–loan gap. Second, the central bank turned over the surplus profits to the central budget, which amounted to RMB1.13 trillion in the first three quarters of 2022. With these funds, the fiscal departments implemented tax credit refunds, which increased the deposits of economic entities in the absence of lending activities. As a result, the deposit–loan gap expanded. Third, the methodology for statistics on financial instruments has also contributed to the widening gap. Policy and development banks have launched over RMB600 billion worth of financial instruments this year to replenish capital for major projects on infrastructure, fundamental industries, and the people’s livelihood. Funds raised through these financial instruments were then deposited into banks by project companies. However, they were not calculated as loans from policy and development banks. This statistical methodology has led to a wider deposit–loan gap. Similarly, the major economies have also witnessed a growing deposit–loan gap in recent years, mainly due to the diversification of the banks’ asset structure, especially the banking system’s support for deficit spending. In the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, central banks or banks in the U.S., Europe, Japan, and other major advanced economies supported a fiscal expansion by purchasing government bonds. The funds raised were then spent and became deposits in the real economy, resulting in a larger deposit–loan gap. For instance, the deposit–loan gap in the U.S. surged to over USD3 trillion in February 2020 from less than USD200 billion at end-2007. Asthe U.S. government implemented a large-scale fiscal stimulus after the outbreak of COVID-19, the deposit–loan gap widened further to the elevated level of above USD7 trillion in October 2021. It still remained above USD6 trillion at end-September 2022, despite a moderate decline since the beginning of this year.On the whole, the widening of the deposit–loan gap can be explained by more diversified channels of monetary creation apart from loans with no direct link to the conversion of savings into investments. Since the beginning of this year, deposits in China’s banking system have grown rapidly, and household precautionary savings have also increased due to COVID-19 and other factors. In addition, the cycle between household deposits and corporate deposits was not yet smooth. At end-September, the growth of outstanding household deposits registered 14.5 percent, 3.3 percentage points higher than the growth of 11.2 percent for corporate deposits. From January to September, household deposits increased by RMB13.2 trillion, accounting for 58 percent of total new deposits, 6.9 percentage points higher than that in the same period of 2021. As this structural shift has not reduced the size of total deposits, it has not changed the deposit-loan gap. III. Money supply and the AFRE grew at a reasonable pace The reasonable growth of money and credit aggregates has provided strong support to the real economy. At end-September, outstanding broad money M2, narrow money M1, and currency in circulation M0 registered RMB262.7 trillion, RMB66.5 trillion, and RMB9.9 trillion, respectively, up 12.1 percent, 6.4 percent, and 13.6 percent year on year, respectively. The first three quarters of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB784.7 billion, RMB529.5 billion more than that in the same period of 2021. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB340.65 trillion at end-September. Its year-on-year growth registered 10.6 percent, up 0.3percentage points compared with that at end-2021. In the first three quarters of 2022, the AFRE increment totaled RMB27.77 trillion, RMB3.01 trillion more than that in the same period of 2021. The AFRE has the following structural features: first, the increment in RMB loans grew significantly year on year. In the first three quarters of 2022, the increment in RMB loans issued by financial institutions to the real economy grew by RMB1.06 trillion year on year to RMB17.89 trillion, accounting for 64.4 percent of the AFRE increment during the same period. Second, the increment in government bonds increased year on year, while that in corporate bonds decreased year on year. In the first three quarters of 2022, their numbers were RMB1.5 trillion more and RMB241.3 billion less than those in the corresponding period of the previous year, respectively. Third, off-balance-sheet financing decreased at a slower pace. In the first three quarters of 2022, the increase in entrusted loans was RMB444 billion more than that in the first three quarters of 2021, while decreases in trust loans and undiscounted bankers’ acceptances were RMB745.6 billion and RMB133.7 billion less than that in the same period of 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions decreased by a larger margin year on year, while loans written off grew more than in the previous year.IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level Since the beginning of 2022, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and on the whole market expectations have been generally stable. The market has played a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate and the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as an automatic stabilizer for the macro economy and the balance of payments. In the first three quarters of the year, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate depreciated against a basket of currencies. At end-September, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB Exchange Rate Index and the RMB Exchange Rate Index based on the specialdrawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 101.03 and 98.27, respectively, down 1.4 percent and 2.1 percent from end-2021, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB depreciated 0.2 percent and 4.4 percent, respectively, in the first three quarters of this year. From 2005 when the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation regime began to end-Q3 2022, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated 48.4 percent and 51.2 percent, respectively. In the first three quarters of this year, the RMB depreciated against the US dollar. At end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 7.0998, depreciating 10.2 percent from end-2021 and appreciating 16.6 percent on a cumulative basis since the beginning of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005. In the first three quarters of 2022, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 5.4 percent. In the first three quarters of 2022, cross-border RMB settlements increased 15 percent year on year to RMB31.5 trillion, with RMB receipts and payments posting RMB15.3 trillion and RMB16.2 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 31 percent year on year to RMB7.5 trillion. Specifically, RMB settlements under trade in goods registered RMB5.7 trillion, while RMB settlements under trade in services and under other items registered RMB1.8 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB24 trillion, increasing 11 percent year on year.Part 2 Monetary Policy Operations In Q3 2022, with resolute implementation of the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and in line with the requirement that COVID-19 should be contained, the economy should be stabilized, and development should be safe, the PBC fully implemented a package of policies and follow-up measures to stabilize the economy, attached greater priority to stabilizing economic growth, enhanced implementation of a sound monetary policy, gave full play to the dual functions of monetary policy tools in adjusting the credit aggregate and structure, and guided financial institutions to strongly support the real economy, especially micro and small businesses (MSBs), tech innovation, green development, and infrastructure, thereby standing firm in contributing to the stability of the national economy. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. In Q3 2022, the PBC injected medium and long-term liquidity by adopting a mix of tools, such as the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending, and the turning over of surplus profits. Based on this, the PBC conducted open market operations on a daily basis and, with respect to funding supply and demand, adjusted the scale of open market operations in a flexible and targeted manner, thus keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. On August 15, the rates paid on the open-market 7-day reverse repos and the 1-year MLF both declined by 10 basis points, to 2.0 percent and 2.75 percent, respectively, which was conducive to uplifting market confidence, elevating effective demand, and consolidating the stabilizing and upward trend momentum in economic development. In mid to late September, given the growing short-term liquidity demand driven by factors such as the quarter-end period and the National Day holiday, the PBC conducted 14-day reverse repos on the first business day that these operations would mature in October, thus proactively providing cross-quarter liquidity in advance. Coupled with intensified 7-day reverse repos operations, these efforts stabilized market expectations in a timely manner and effectively maintained money-market stability at the end of the quarter. In Q3, the weighted average rate on 7-day repos between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) posted 1.52 percent, a decrease of 20 basis points from Q2 and 65 basis points from Q3 of 2021. Interest rates witnessed heightened stability at the end of the quarter. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q3 2022, the PBC conducted three batches of CBS operations, totaling RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. Since the beginning of this year, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized banks, and in strengthening credit supply capacity.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q3 2022, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. The regular issuance of central bank bills in Hong Kong is conducive to promoting the sound development of the offshore RMB money market and the bond market and to propelling both domestic and overseas entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market. II. Conducting medium-term lending facility and standing lending facility operations Conducting MLF operations to fully meet market demand. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions of medium-term policy rates for interest rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB2.55 trillion of MLF operations in the first three quarters of 2022, all with a maturity of one year. The interest rate registered 2.85 percent in the first seven months and declined by 10 basis points to 2.75 percent in August and September. In particular, MLF operations conducted in Q3 amounted to RMB900 billion. At end-September, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.55 trillion, which was on par with that at the beginning of 2022. Conducting standing lending facility (SLF) operations. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations and strengthen the stability ofliquidity in the banking system. In the first three quarters, the PBC conducted a total of RMB10.5 billion of SLF operations, of which operations in Q3 registered RMB2.2 billion. The balance of SLF operations at end-September posted RMB800 million. The SLF rate continued to serve as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor and to maintain the smooth operation of the money market. At end-September, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.85 percent, 3.00 percent, and 3.35 percent, respectively, down 0.1 percentage points from those at end-June. III. Adjusting the foreign exchange required reserve ratio for financial institutions The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was lowered for financial institutions to enhance their foreign exchange liquidity management. The PBC lowered the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by 2 percentage points, from 8 percent to 6 percent, effective on September 15, 2022. This move will release around USD17 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. Following the first cut by one percentage point on May 15, this was the second reduction of the ratio this year. IV. Further improving the macro prudential management framework The role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) was given full play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In the first three quarters of 2022, the PBC further optimized the MPA assessment framework and guided financial institutions to enhance stability in the growth of credit aggregates and to ramp up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector, and for green development. The foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales was raised when appropriate. In order to stabilize foreign exchange market expectations and strengthen macro prudential management, the PBC decided to raise the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from 0 to 20 percent, effective from September 28, 2022. The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was refined. The PBC and CBIRC jointly solicited public comments on the Assessment Methodology of Systemically Important Insurance Companies (Exposure Draft) beginning on July 8. The document stipulates the methods, coverage, procedures, and division of work in assessing domestic systemically important insurance companies. On the basis of the size of their assets, the top ten largest insurance groups, life insurance companies, property and casualty insurance companies, and reinsurance companies were assessed based on four dimensions, i.e., size, interconnectedness,asset liquidation, and substitutability. On September 9, the PBC and CBIRC released the list of China’s systemically important banks (SIBs) for 2022. A total of 19 banks were designated as SIBs, consisting of six state-owned commercial banks, nine joint-stock commercial banks, and four city commercial banks. The SIBs fell into five groups in ascending score in terms of systemic importance. Group One contained nine banks, including China Minsheng Bank, China Everbright Bank, Ping An Bank, Huaxia Bank, Bank of Ningbo, China Guangfa Bank, Bank of Jiangsu, Bank of Shanghai, and Bank of Beijing. Group Two contained three banks, including China CITIC Bank, Postal Savings Bank of China, and Shanghai Pudong Development Bank. Group Three contained three banks, including Bank of Communications, China Merchants Bank, and Industrial Bank. Group Four contained four banks, including Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Bank of China, China Construction Bank, and Agricultural Bank of China. At the time, there were no banks included in Group Five. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policy instruments to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and weak links in the economy and for coordinated regional development. Central bank lending to support rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand their credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to current regulations so as to consolidate the achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBC promoted coordinated regional development by guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces to make effective use of policy instruments, such as central bank lending, and to expand credit supply for weak links within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private enterprises. Stepped-up efforts were made to provide relief and assistance for MSBs, and locally incorporated financial institutions were guided to employ central bank lending for MSBs and self-employed businesses that were heavily hit by surging commodity prices and COVID-19, so as to reduce their financing costs. To give play to the role of finance in supporting effective investments, the PBC employed PSL to support the development banks and policy banks in setting up financial instruments and providing credit support for key areas in the infrastructure sector. At end-September, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB558.7 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.3863 trillion and RMB157.6 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB544.9 billion, while outstanding PSL posted RMB2.6481 trillion.Continuously implementing instruments in support of inclusive MSB loans to bolster the development of MSBs. Starting from Q2 2022, the PBC provided incentive funding on a quarterly basis in the amount of 2 percent of the incremental balance of inclusive MSB loans issued by locally incorporated banks so as to encourage the banks to extend inclusive MSB loans. In Q3, the PBC provided incentive funding of RMB8.6 billion to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increase of RMB438.7 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Since implementation of this instrument, incentive funding from the PBC to locally incorporated financial institutions totaled RMB21.3 billion, supporting a total increase of RMB1.2947 trillion in inclusive MSB loans. Implementing both the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal so as to support the green and low-carbon transition of the economy. In Q3, through these two instruments, the PBC provided relevant financial institutions with RMB64.2 billion and RMB22.2 billion, respectively, or total funding of RMB86.4 billion. Since implementation of these two instruments, the PBC cumulatively provided RMB246.9 billion and RMB57.8 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB304.7 billion. In August, Deutsche Bank China and Société Générale China were added to the list of financial institutions eligible for the CERF, showing that China pays great attention to the green transition, always adheres to its opening-up policy, provides foreign financial institutions with national treatment and supports their development in China. Accelerating implementation of special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and the transport and logistics sectors, respectively. In Q3, through the aforementioned three instruments, the PBC provided relevant financial institutions with central bank lending totaling RMB80 billion, RMB400 million, and RMB10.3 billion, respectively. In October, the quota for special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation was increased by RMB200 billion, further enhancing support for innovative sci-tech enterprises. Establishing the special central bank lending facility for equipment upgrading to support financial institutions in providing loans to sectors including infrastructure, social services, MSMEs, and self-employed businesses. In September, the PBC, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), the Ministry of Finance, the National Audit Office, and the CBIRC jointly issued the Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for Equipment Upgrading (Yinfa No.211 [2022]). With the aim of providing targeted liquidity and incentives and in line with market-oriented principles, the special central bank lending facility for equipment upgrading was established with a quota of over RMB200 billion to support financial institutions to provide loans with an interest rate no greater than 3.2 percent sectors to enterprises in relevant sectors to upgrade their equipment. The facility has adopted a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a monthly basis. Specifically, financial institutions are subject totheir own decision-making at their own risk, and they can apply for funding support from the PBC under the special central bank lending facility after they grant loans to eligible enterprises in the relevant sectors. For qualified loans, the PBC provides funding for 100 percent of the principal through central bank lending with an interest rate of 1.75 percent, while the Ministry of Finance offers an interest subsidy of 2.5 percentage points. The PBC and the relevant departments set up a cross-department cooperation mechanism following release of the policy to design implementation plans for this facility and to track and guide banks in accelerating the approval and issuance of loans, so as to promote early policy implementation and ensure it will deliver results as soon as possible. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in structural guidance Constantly enhancing financial services for MSBs. We encouraged financial institutions to follow market-oriented principles to allow deferrals of principal and interest repayments on loans to eligible MSBs and self-employed businesses as well as truck drivers and on individual housing loans and consumer loans. We ramped up implementation of supportive instruments for inclusive MSB loans to better guide and support the granting of MSB loans by locally incorporated banks. We urged financial institutions to fully implement the requirements of the Notice of the People’s Bank of China on Promoting the Establishment of the Long-term Mechanism for Boosting the Confidence, Willingness, Capability, and Professionalism of Financial Institutions to Lend to Micro and Small Businesses and Private Businessess, to enhance their allocation of internal resources and policy arrangements, to improve their use of sci-tech measures, to constantly increase MSB lending, and to boost financial services for MSBs. As of end-September, inclusive MSB loans registered a year-on-year increase of 24.6 percent to an outstanding amount of RMB23.2 trillion, which has been granted to 53.89 million MSBs, an increase of 31.7 percent from the previous year. Box 2 Leveraging the Role of Policy-based and Development-oriented Financial Instruments to Help Boost Infrastructure Construction and Stabilize the Economy It was highlighted at the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China that the nation will develop a modern infrastructure system. The 11th session of the Central Financial and Economic Affairs Commission underscored that infrastructure does the heavy lifting to support economic and social development, and efforts should be made to meet the financing needs of infrastructure construction and to broaden long-term fundraising channels so as to ensure that the funding needs of the nation’s major infrastructure projects will be met. Since the beginning of 2022, the Chinese economy has been facing downward pressures amid a range of factors, and infrastructure construction and investment has served as an important means to stabilize the economy. In accordance with the policy arrangements of the CPC CentralCommittee and the State Council and the requirements of the State Council’s Financial Stability and Development Committee, in June 2022 the PBC supported the China Development Bank and the Agriculture Development Bank of China to set up financial instruments, with a combined scale of RMB300 billion. to address difficulties in fully funding major projects. The funds raised via these instruments aim to replenish capital for major projects such as new infrastructure or to bridge financing for projects backed by special-purpose bonds. The State Council executive meeting noted on August 24, 2022 that an additional quota of over RMB300 billion would be allocated following the first batch of financial instruments in the amount of RMB300 billion was put in place, and the Export-Import Bank of China was to be included to provide such instruments. Implementation of policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments calls for well-designed working mechanisms. The PBC worked with the NDRC, MOF, and CBIRC to further improve the institutional arrangements. First, funds from financial instruments should be invested in projects chosen independently by policy banks per market-oriented and law-based principles. The NDRC, along with local governments, relevant ministries. and enterprises directly under the central government selected an adequate number of potential projects, thus creating favorable conditions for independent investments by these three banks. Second, moral hazards should be guarded against to foster the smooth completion of the projects. It is clearly defined that the investment amount via financial instruments of each individual project should not exceed 50 percent of its capital, therefore ramping up support and guiding the project owners to ensure the connection of capital from other sources and supporting funding schemes for the completion of the projects. Third, a coordination mechanism should be established to strengthen holistic support. Ensuring that funds are in place is the first step in the process of construction, and economic and social benefits can only be achieved after the kick-off of major projects. The NDRC took the lead in establishing a coordination mechanism, and 18 ministries worked cooperatively and efficiently to ramp up holistic support and to ensure that concrete progress should gather pace in project construction. Financial instruments have effectively supported infrastructure construction and helped stabilize the economy thanks to concerted efforts by relevant parties. First, stepped-up efforts have been made to fix capital shortfalls of major projects. As of end-October 2022, two batches of financial instruments have injected RMB740 billion into projects, strongly supporting capital replenishment of major projects in areas such as transportation, energy, water conservancy, municipal construction, and industrial upgrading infrastructure. Second, supporting financing has been provided vigorously. Policy and development banks are encouraged to make effective use of the new credit line of RMB800 billion, and commercial banksare guided to follow up the supporting financing needs of major projects via syndicated loans. Credit lines of more than RMB3.5 trillion have been granted to projects backed by the banks’ financial instruments to meet the differentiated financing needs for project construction. Third, concrete progress in project construction has been expedited. Projects supported by the first batch of financial instruments of RMB300 billion were all under construction in Q3 2022 and project construction backed by the second batch is scheduled to kick off in stages in Q4 to ensure the start of more projects in 2022. Cumulative infrastructure investments in the first three quarters of this year grew by 8.6 percent from the previous year, a figure remarkably higher than the annual growth of 0.4 percent in the previous year. The rapid implementation of projects backed by financial instruments will continuously deliver the combined effects of boosting investment, driving employment, and promoting consumption. In the next stage, the PBC will follow the policy arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, cooperate on and promote the start of projects, and ensure the provision of funding for infrastructure construction, speed up the putting in place capital from other sources, accelerate the use of funds from financial instruments, support the continuity of and connections with supporting financing schemes, and foster more effective investments in a faster manner in an effort to consolidate the stabilizing and upward trend of the momentum of the economy. Making further headway in providing financial services for rural revitalization. We continued to put in place the Opinions on Ensuring Financial Support for Advancing Rural Revitalization on All Fronts in 2022 and worked with a number of ministries to release the Notice on Ensuring the Purchase of Autumn Grain and the Implementation Plan for Rural Road Construction to Expand Investment, Stabilize Employment, and Better Serve Rural Revitalization. We held seminars on how to provide financial services for rural revitalization in related areas, conducted investigations and research into financial services for seed companies, guided financial institutions to further increase the supply of financing to key areas, such as securing the supply of grain and key agricultural products, underpinning the foundations for modern agriculture, and promoting rural construction, thus continuously enhancing the quality and efficiency of financial services for rural revitalization. As of end-September, outstanding agro-related loans registered a year-on-year increase of 13.7 percent, reaching RMB48.49 trillion, among which loans to rural infrastructure construction and to basic farmland construction grew by 16.5 percent and 25.9 percent, respectively. Further expanding medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector. We encouraged banks to channel more resources into this area. Under thecoordination mechanism for promoting effective investments in major projects, banks are encouraged to establish task forces for expanding medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector, speed up financing matchmaking, track these matchmaking schemes, and boost lending efficiency. We have organized a number of meetings to promote this work, strengthened policy guidance and supervision, and responded to the concerns of market entities in a timely manner. Medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector continued to maintain rapid growth, registering an outstanding amount of RMB8.75 trillion at end-September. Its year-on-year growth of 30.8 percent surpassed overall loan growth by nearly 20 percent. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform have been continuously unleashed and oversight on deposit rates has been improved, thus further bringing down the actual loan rates. The LPR reform was further promoted to play its guiding role. The one-year and over-five-year LPR have dropped 0.15 and 0.35 percentage points, respectively, this year, leading to slightly declining but still stable actual rates for corporate loans. Corporate financing costs have dropped significantly. The weighted average loan rate in September fell 0.66 percentage points year on year to 4.34 percent. In particular, the weighted average rate on corporate loans dropped by 0.59 percentage points year on year, reaching a record low of 4.0 percent. The market-oriented deposit rate adjustment mechanism played a significant role. In mid-September, several nationwide banks lowered their deposit rates, encouraging other banks to follow suit. This self-adjustment by banks based on market rate conditions marks a crucial step forward in the market-oriented reform of deposit rates. The weighted average rate on term deposits in September posted 2.30 percent, a decrease of 0.14 percentage points from April before the adjustment mechanism was established. This helps reduce the banks’ liability costs and promotes lower actual loan rates, thereby providing favorable conditions for high-quality economic development. The PBC temporarily lowered the interest rate floor on commercial personal housing loans for first homes in some cities and encouraged the corresponding local governments to fully employ policy tools for the stable and sound development of the real estate market. In addition, the interest rate on personal housing provident fund loans for first-time home buyers was lowered by 0.15 percentage points to meet basic funding demands of fund users. Box 3 Temporary Lowering of the Interest Rate Floor on First-home Loans in Some CitiesOn September 29, 2022, the PBC and CBIRC released a notice to temporarily lower the interest rate floor on first-home loans in some cities. The local governments of the qualified cities can decide whether to maintain, lower, or remove the interest rate floor on newly issued first-home loans until end-2022. Currently, there are two types of personal housing loans in China: commercial housing loans and personal housing provident fund loans. The commercial housing loans adopt “three-layer pricing”: first, the PBC and CBIRC determine the interest rate floor at the national level; based on this “bottom line,” the municipal governments set the floor at the local level according to the “city-specific” principle; then, at the bank level, the commercial bank reached an agreement with the borrower on a specific interest rate after considering the funding costs and the credit risk. Currently, the interest rate floor on commercial first-home loans at the national level is equal to the LPR less 20 basis points. The floor on second-home loans is equal to the LPR plus 60 basis points. The interest rate on personal housing provident fund loans is determined and distributed by the PBC. The policy introduced on September 29 is applicable to cities with continuous declines in both month-on-month and year-on-year price growth of newly constructed commercial housing between June and August (there are 23 qualified cities according to the 70 Major Cities Index published by the National Bureau of Statistics). The LPR-minus-20 basis points interest rate floor on commercial first-home loans can be lowered until end-2022. This temporary policy is targeted at commercial housing loans for first-time home buyers. It lasts until end-2022, after which the previous policy will automatically take effect again. This arrangement helps qualified local governments to fully employ policy tools based on local property market conditions. It better supports basic housing demands and reflects that “housing is for living in, not for speculation,” thus safeguarding the stable and sound development of the real estate market. Local governments have actively responded to the policy through corresponding adjustments. In cities including Jining of Shandong Province, Huanggang of Hubei, Qingyuan and Yangjiang of Guangdong, and Wenzhou and Zhoushan of Zhejiang, the interest rate floors on newly issued first-home loans have been lowered by 15–40 basis points to the LPR minus 35–60 basis points. Some cities in Hubei and Guangdong provinces have temporarily removed the interest rate floor on these loans. In terms of the actual rates on commercial housing loans, the newly issued loans in October 2022 carried an average rate of 4.3 percent, decreasing 4 basis points from the previous month and 133 basis points from the end of the previous year. Meanwhile, as another supportive measure for people with basic housing demands, onOctober 1, 2022, the PBC lowered the interest rates on personal housing provident fund loans for first-time home buyers by 0.15 percentage points. The subsequent rates on loans with maturities within and over 5 years are 2.6 percent and 3.1 percent, respectively. This is the first reduction in the interest rate of these first-home loans since August 2015. The interest rate policy for second-time personal housing provident fund loans remains unchanged: the rates on loans with maturities within and over 5 years should be no less than 3.025 percent and 3.575 percent, respectively. In the next step, the PBC will maintain the principle that “housing is for living in, not for speculation,” fully implement the long-term mechanism for the real estate market, ensure differentiated credit policy implementation by adhering to the “city-specific” principle, and better satisfy a reasonable housing demand to promote stable and sound development of the real estate market. VIII. Advancing the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate The PBC continued to advance the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate and improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. The market continued to play a decisive role in determining the exchange rate. The PBC focused on guiding expectations and enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate while keeping it basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The RMB’s currency value and purchasing power were also basically stable, and the exchange rate continued to play a role in macroeconomic management and as an auto stabilizer for the balance of payments. In Q3 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the US dollar were 6.6863 and 7.1107, respectively. During the 65 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 27 days and depreciated on 38 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 0.47 percent (320 bps) and 0.6 percent (424 bps), respectively. The RMB depreciated against the dollar while it appreciated against other major currencies. As of end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the dollar depreciated 10.2 percent from end-2021, while the central parity of the RMB against the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen appreciated 3.3 percent, 8.3 percent, and 12.5 percent, respectively, during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism that commenced in 2005 to end-September 2022, the RMB appreciated by a cumulative total of 16.6 percent, 43.3 percent, and 48.3 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreignexchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs for microeconomic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and investment. As of end-September, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and the foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB84.262 billion and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD360 million. These operations actively promoted bilateral trade and investment.Box 4 A Solid Foundation for Maintaining Basic Stability of the RMB Exchange Rate Since 2022, the RMB exchange rate has been kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and supply and demand in the foreign exchange market has achieved an overall balance. Specifically, development of the exchange rate has the following two characteristics. First, in terms of the bilateral exchange rate, the RMB has depreciated only against the US dollar and it has appreciated against the other major currencies. Due to the impact of several factors such as the accelerated and enhanced tightening of the Fed’s monetary policy and rising risk-aversion sentiments, the US dollar has witnessed fairly robust performance, with the US dollar Index increasing by approximately 17 percent in Q3. However, from the beginning of 2022 to end-September, the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yensignificantly weakened and hit historical low levels, depreciating by 13.8 percent, 17.5 percent, and 20.5 percent against the US dollar, respectively. Impacted by the price comparison effect, the RMB depreciated against the US dollar by about 10 percent over the same period, while it appreciated against the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen by 3.3 percent, 8.3 percent, and 12.5 percent, respectively. In addition, the RMB appreciated against the currencies in the peripheral economies such as the Thai baht and the South Korean won and against the currencies of the emerging economies such as the South African Rand to differing extents. Second, the RMB exchange rate has been kept basically stable against a basket of currencies. For 2022, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB Index generally stayed above 100 and hit a high of over 107 in March, weighing the RMB exchange rate against a basket of currencies. The SDR Currency Basket RMB Index and the BIS Currency Basket RMB Index witnessed slight depreciations in the first three quarters of 2022. As a weighted average exchange rate, the Exchange Rate Indices are mainly used to comprehensively calculate the movements of the home currency against a basket of foreign currencies. Compared with the bilateral exchange rates, they can more comprehensively and objectively reflect the valuation changes of the home currency against a basket of foreign currencies. From this perspective, globally the value of the RMB has remained stable. Going forward, there will be a solid foundation for the RMB exchange rate to continuously be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, supported by the fundamentals and policies. In terms of the fundamentals, first, the domestic economy is generally stable with an upward trend in momentum, which is the biggest fundamental for the stability of the exchange rate. Since May, a package of policies to stabilize the economy and subsequent measures have been implemented and put into effect, forcefully stabilizing market expectations and confidence. Thereby, the economy rebounded and improved. According to the unified arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, emphasis has been placed on guaranteeing the supply and price stability of food and energy. The monetary and fiscal policies have proved to be forceful, well-measured, and effective in accomplishing the task of maintaining price stability against the global backdrop of high inflation, which is not an easy task. Though facing downward pressures in the short run, the Chinese economy still has strong resilience, enormous potential, and abundant vigor and the fundamentals for long-term growth remain unchanged, which is still an important stabilizer and powerhouse for global economic growth. Second, the foundation for the balance of payments is solid, which is also the fundamental basis for the stable operation of the foreign exchange market. In the first three quarters of 2022, the surplus under the current account stood at USD310.4 billion, increasing 56 percent year on year. In particular, the trade in goods surplus for the first three quarters postedat USD645.2 billion, rising 52 percent year on year. The abundant fund net inflows from the trade channel have sufficiently satisfied the demand of domestic enterprises and residents for foreign exchange, which constitutes the fundamental basis for the balanced supply and demand of foreign exchange and the stable operation of the foreign exchange market. Meanwhile, the status of the RMB as a reserve currency has been raised further, maintaining a strong attraction to global investors. On May 11, the weight of the RMB in the SDR currency basket of the IMF was raised from 10.92 percent to 12.28 percent. Third, China’s foreign exchange reserves rank first globally, which is the cornerstone for maintaining exchange rate stability and safeguarding financial security. At end-September 2022, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.03 trillion, continuously remaining above USD3 trillion, which will cover foreign exchange payments for imports for over one year. At end-June, according to the international investment position table, external assets hit USD9.2 trillion. Compared with the foreign exchange reserves, the short-term external debt remained at a low level. Therefore, the foreign exchange held by the state, the financial sector, and economic entities is sufficient to withstand external shocks. In terms of policies, first, the PBC has adhered to the principle of allowing the market to play a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate. In China, the PBC implements a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. With the continuous deepening of the market-oriented foreign exchange reform and the constant improvements in macro-prudential management, full play can be given to the “two hands” of the market and the government. Meanwhile, the PBC has exited from normal interventions, and it lets market supply and demand decide on the RMB exchange rate. The formation mechanism for the RMB central parity against the USD. which is more rule-based, transparent, and market-oriented, has continuously improved, The elasticity of the exchange rate has been obviously enhanced, better playing its role in adjusting the macro economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The market-oriented RMB exchange rate has enhanced the autonomy of monetary policy. The PBC has implemented a sound monetary policy with a focus on domestic conditions, balanced international payments, and it promoted a balance between internal and external equilibria, which is conducive to long-term economic development. Second, this mechanism has withstood the test of several rounds of external shocks in history. Amid the multiple rounds of major shocks, such as the international financial crisis, global trade frictions, the global spread of COVID-19, global inflation, and the tightening of monetary policy in the developed economies, the RMB exchange rate has been flexibly adjusted and it has achieved an equilibrium within a short period, effectively playing its role as a “cushion” against external shocks. After several rounds of exchange rate overshooting, the PBC has accumulated rich experience in dealing with the situation and it can effectively manage market expectations, providing strong support for the stability ofthe exchange rate. Going forward, the PBC will continue to implement the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It will adhere to letting the market play a decisive role in the formation of the exchange rate. Adopting comprehensive measures, the PBC will stabilize expectations, enhance the elasticity of the RMB exchange rate, and guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral. Determined to smooth large fluctuations in the exchange rate, the PBC will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions New achievements were made to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with some prominent financial risks properly managed. Addressing the risks of key groups and large enterprises was steadily advanced. The central bank rating of financial institutions in Q2 2022 was completed, which indicated that the number of high-risk financial institutions had been reduced virtually by one-half from the peak. The PBC conducted stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions, and it gradually established a stress-testing framework in line with the domestic financial situation. It also strengthened the monitoring and early warnings on bank risks, made timely corrections in response to the emerging problems of banks, and guided any anomaly indexes in most of the banks to return to normal, thereby promoting early identification and resolution of risks. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scopes, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main businesses, and give full play to their roles in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthened risk prevention and control. X. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Enhancing the coverage and quality of facilitation policies for quality enterprises. The SAFE continuously conducted policy promotion and training, shared the bestpractices of business conduct by banks, and improved management on entry guidance, evaluation of effectiveness, and exit supervision, which constantly improved the facilitation experience of market entities. As of end-September, 251 banks were eligible for facilitation policies, conducting 1.631 million business facilitations for 5,023 enterprises, in an amount totaling USD967.4 billion. Optimizing policies to facilitate cross-border use of funds for multinational corporations. In July 2022, the Reply by the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on Conducting the Second Batch of Pilot Projects to Integrate Local and Foreign Currency Capital Pools for Multinational Corporations in Shanghai and Other Regions was issued. Forty enterprises in regions, such as Shanghai, Guangdong, Shaanxi, Beijing, Shenzhen, Zhejiang, Qingdao, and Ningbo, were permitted to carry out the pilot program of integrating their local and foreign currency capital pools. Administrative policies were further optimized, facilitating the coordinated use of cross-border funds for multinational corporations. Part 3 Financial Market Conditions In Q3 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates continued to feature a downward movement, with increased transaction volumes. The interest rates of bond issuances generally dropped, with issuance volumes picking up. The stock market index moved downward such that turnover and the amount of fundraising were decreasing year on year. In the insurance industry, premium revenue rose year on year, and asset growth accelerated. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates witnessed a continuous decline, with increased market transactions In September 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 1.41 percent, and the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos posted 1.46 percent, 15 basis points and 11 basis points, lower than those in June 2022, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate for government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.31 percent, 15 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos in the interbank market. At end-September, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.08 percent and 2.06 percent, respectively, down 14 basis points and 21 basis points from end-September 2021, respectively. Market transaction volumes increased. In Q1–Q3 2022, the volume of bond repostrading on the interbank market reached RMB1047.6 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB5.6 trillion, up 40.1 percent year on year. The cumulative volume of trading for interbank lending registered RMB114.2 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB610.8 billion and a year-on-year increase of 30.6 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 86.6 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2.8 percentage points year on year, and overnight lending constituted 89.5 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, up 0.3 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 18.4 percent year on year to RMB297.7 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposits (CDs) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In Q3 2022, about 6,091 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market,raising RMB4.8 trillion. The total volume of trading on the secondary market registered RMB72.8 trillion. At end-September, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.5 trillion. In Q3 2022, the weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 1.72 percent, 1 basis point lower than that of the 3-month Shibor. In Q3 2022, about 11,561 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB2.7 trillion, an increase of RMB301.3 billion year on year. Interest rate swap transactions witnessed steady operations. In Q3 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 72,000 transactions, increasing 15.4 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB6.3 trillion, an increase of 15.1 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly, and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB4.3 trillion, accounting for 68.6 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate (FDR) and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 88.9 percent and 10.6 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q3 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 203 transactions, with RMB26.27 billion of the notional principal.The interest rate options business developed at a steady pace. In Q3 2022, a total of 167 interest rate options transactions were concluded, totaling RMB23.872 billion, all of which were LPR interest rate cap/floor transactions. 2. The coupon rates of bonds generally declined, while bond issuances expanded with active trading of spot bonds The coupon rates of bonds generally declined. In September, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.70 percent, 4 basis points lower than that in June. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 2.86 percent, 9 basis points lower than the rate in June. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.01 percent, 16 basis points higher than the rateThe yield on government securities went down with expanded term spreads. At end-September, yields on 1-year, 3-year, 5-year, 7-year, and 10-year government securities decreased by 10 basis points, 12 basis points, 7 basis points, 8 basis points, and 6 basis points, to 1.85 percent, 2.33 percent, 2.58 percent, 2.76 percent, and 2.76 percent from end-June, respectively. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 91 basis points, expanding 4 basis points from end-June. Bond issuances increased year on year. In Q1–Q3 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 3.8 percent, or RMB1.7 trillion year on year to RMB46.8 trillion, driven mostly by surges in government bonds, financial bonds issued by the CDB, and policy financial bonds. At end-September, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB143.9 trillion, representing an increase of 12.3 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed a marked increase. In Q1–Q3 2022, the value of cash bond trading on the bond market posted RMB229.7 trillion, registering an increase of 31.1 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bond trading on the interbank market was RMB200.8 trillion, representing an increase of 29.6 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB28.9 trillion, an increase of 43 percent year on year.3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market generally decreased The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In Q1–Q3 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB20.4 trillion, rising 13.7 percent year on year. At end-Q3, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB17.0 trillion, increasing by 16.7 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances saw steady growth. At end-September, outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew by RMB2.0562 trillion and RMB399.5 billion compared to the beginning of 2022 and end-June, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 67.9 percent were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with interest rates generally moving downward. In Q1–Q3 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB41.9 trillion, growing 19.9 percent year on year. At end-September, the balance of bill financing was RMB12.4 trillion, up 34.7 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.9 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 1 percentage point year on year. In Q1–Q3, the interest rates on the bill market generally went down.4. The stock market indices fell and the trading volume and amount of fundraising decreased year on year The stock market indices dropped. At end-September 2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,024 points, a decrease of 11 percent from end-June. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 10,779 points, a decrease of 16.4 percent from end-June. Turnover on the stock markets declined year on year. In Q1–Q3, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB174.1 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB956.4 billion, representing a decrease of 8.8 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets witnessed a slight dip year on year. In Q1–Q3, cumulative fundraising reached RMB989.9 billion, a decrease of 1.7 percent year on year. 5. Premium income increased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In Q1–Q3, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB3.8 trillion, up 4.9 percent year on year and an acceleration of 5.7 percentage points compared to that at end-2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB1.1 trillion, representing a year-on-year decrease of 1 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 1.7 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went down by 3.3 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-September, totalassets in the insurance sector increased 9.8 percent year on year to RMB26.7 trillion, an acceleration of 3 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 9.5 percent and investment-linked assets increased by 9.3 percent year on year.6. The turnover of spot foreign exchange transactions declined year on year In Q1–Q3 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD6.5 trillion, a decrease of 13.1 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD15.4 trillion, an increase of 5.3 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD10.1 trillion, accounting for 65.4 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD105.4 billion, an increase of 26.2 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD1.1 trillion, an increase of 6.3 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 55.2 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, while international gold prices declined At end-September 2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,671.75 per ounce, representing a decrease of 6.8 percent from end-2021. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB390.00 per gram, a decline of 4.3 percent from end-2021. In Q3 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 11,300 tons, representing growth of 43.8 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB4.34 trillion, representing growth of 47.5 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Opening up in the financial market Swap Connect between Mainland and Hong Kong made its debut. On July 4, the PBC, the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (HKSFC), and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) jointly announced the launch of mutual access between the Hong Kong and Mainland interest rate swap markets (Swap Connect). Swap Connect facilitated participation in the mainland RMB currency swap market by overseas investors and supported the financial opening-up at an elevated level. Bond Connect has operated smoothly and efficiently during the past five years. OnJuly 4, the PBC, HKSFC, and HKMA jointly hosted the fifth anniversary forum of Bond Connect and the launch of Swap Connect via video link. Since its inception in 2017, Bond Connect has been operating smoothly and efficiently and has been serving as a two-way bridge, marking a major milestone in deepening the opening-up of China’s financial markets. Moving forward, the PBC will continue to work with the HKMA, HKSFC, financial market infrastructure service providers, and market agencies to improve the relevant institutional arrangements, support the prosperity and development of Hong Kong as an international financial center, and promote the high-quality development and high-level opening-up of China’s financial market. 2. Institutional arrangements and reforms in the securities market The multi-level capital market system was improved. In July, approved by the CSRC, trading in futures and options based on the China Securities Index (CSI) 1000 Index kicked off on the China Financial Futures Exchange, further meeting investors’ demand for a haven and adding another ballast to market stability. In July, the CSRC launched a pilot program for in-kind share distributions to investors by private equity and venture capital funds, which improved the environment for private equity and venture capital funds to develop and bolster efforts to serve the real economy. The legitimate rights and interests of investors were further protected. In July, the CSRC and MOF jointly released the Provisions on Matters Regarding the Priority Use of Property of Violators of the Securities Law for Civil Compensation, The Provisions clarify the specific working mechanism whereby administrative fines paid by securities law violators shall be used to bear the liability for civil compensation, pioneering the application of prioritizing civil compensation liability in the securities sector. Cooperation on audit regulation was deepened between China and the US. In August, the CSRC, MOF, and the US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board signed an audit oversight cooperation agreement. The agreement set out specific arrangements for conducting inspections and investigations by each side over relevant accounting firms in accordance with the law, laying a foundation for equal and efficient cooperation during the next stage based on complying with each party’s respective laws and regulations. This will further enhance the audit quality of accounting firms and foster a sound international regulatory environment for companies’ pursuit of overseas listings in a lawful and compliant manner. The two-way opening-up forged ahead in the capital market. In July, the depository receipt business under the China-Switzerland Stock Connect was officially launched, expanding channels for two-way cross-border investments and financing, and deepening financial cooperation between China and Switzerland. In August, the trading calendar improvement program of the Shanghai–Hong Kong and Shenzhen–Hong Kong Stock Connect was kicked off for the purposes of improvingthe Stock Connect between the mainland and Hong Kong, enhancing the appeal of both capital markets, and consolidating Hong Kong’s position as an international financial center. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The mechanism for the capital replenishment of insurance companies was improved. In August, the PBC and CBIRC jointly released the Notice on Issues Concerning the Issuance of Undated Capital Bonds by Insurance Companies, allowing insurance companies to replenish core Tier 2 capital by issuing undated capital bonds, provided that the balance of such undated capital bonds does not exceed 30 percent of the insurance company’s core capital. The PBC regulates the overall balance of capital replenishment bonds, including undated capital bonds issued by the insurance companies. The above measures provide more channels for insurance companies to replenish capital and improve their core solvency adequacy level in a way that strengthens the capability of insurance companies to forestall and defuse risks and to serve the real economy, broaden the product range in the financial market, and optimize the structure of the financial system. Supervision over insurance asset management companies was strengthened. In August, the CBIRC revised and released the Rules on Insurance Asset Management Companies. The highlights of the Rules are as follow. First, a special chapter on corporate governance was added, clarifying the requirements on shareholders’ obligations, incentive and restraint mechanisms, the operation of the shareholders’ meeting and the board of directors and supervisors, and so on. Second, a special chapter was dedicated to risk management, laying out the risk management system, the risk management requirements, and the internal control auditing. Third, the equity structure was further optimized with the cap on holding foreign equity removed. Uniform and applicable conditions were clarified and set for all types of shareholders, and management of non-financial company shareholders was strictly enforced. Fourth, operating principles and relevant requirements were optimized. The business scope of insurance asset management companies was refined, adding clear requirements on the establishment of a trustee mechanism. The articles regarding asset independence and prohibition of debt offsetting were improved and channeling business was strictly prohibited. Fifth, new regulatory measures and constraints on non-compliance were introduced. Part 4 Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments As global inflation remains elevated, central banks in the major advanced economiescontinue their policy tightening amid the difficult trade-off between price stability and economic growth. This, coupled with disruptions due to geopolitical tensions, COVID-19, and energy and food crises, has given rise to a broad-based economic slowdown and financial market turmoil. Potential risks merit special attention. 1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies The momentum for economic growth remained under pressure. In the US, GDP grew in Q3 by 2.6 percent at an annualized pace, after contracting for two straight quarters. It remains to be seen whether or not this mild recovery can be sustained. The US Institute for Supply Management Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) fell to 50.2 in October, a new low since May 2020. The Consumer Sentiment Index remained low despite a rebound. The Office of Management and Budget revised downward its US growth forecast for this year from 3.8 percent to 1.4 percent. In the euro area, GDP grew by 2.1 percent in Q3 year on year, but the leading indicators fell. In October, the PMI for manufacturing and services dropped to a 29-month-low of 46.4 and a 20-month-low of 48.6, respectively. In the UK, GDP declined by 0.2 percent quarter on quarter in Q3, slipping back to negative territory since the first quarter of 2021. In Japan, GDP in Q3 contracted by 1.2 percent on an annualized basis. The Japanese government revised downward its growth forecast for the 2022 fiscal year to 2.0 percent from 2.4 percent. The IMF cut its global growth forecast for 2023 by 0.2 percentage points to 2.7 percent. Inflation remained elevated. In October, the US CPI was up by 7.7 percent year on year. It remained high despite a moderate decline from 8.2 percent in September. The core CPI rose by 6.3 percent year on year, edging down from the 6.6 percent in September. The HICP in the euro area rose by 10.7 percent over the prior year, another new high since records began. The CPI in the UK jumped by 11.1 percent compared with the previous year, an all-time high since the 1980s. In September, the increase in consumer prices in a number of emerging markets remained persistently high, rising by 7.4 percent, 7.2 percent, 6.4 percent, and 6 percent in India, Brazil, Thailand, and Indonesia, respectively. The CPI in both Argentina and Turkey surged by more than 80 percent. Labor supply is recovering slowly. On the one hand, insufficient and tight labor supply remains a main problem in the major advanced economies. In the US, job vacancies continued to grow by 437,000 over August to 10.72 million in September, exceeding 10 million for fifteen consecutive months. The unemployment rate was 3.7 percent in October, still close to a 50-year low. On the other hand, labor demand slowed marginally. Growth of US non-farm payrolls slowed to 261,000 in October ona seasonally-adjusted basis, their lowest since 2021. Going forward, performance of the unemployment rate, wage growth, and other labor market indicators will depend on the relative changes in labor supply and demand. Global financial markets witnessed large swings. In Q3, the persistently high inflation and the weakening economic outlook continued to depress major stock indices in the US and Europe. In particular, tech stocks, which earlier had performed well, saw a notable decline. The tax-slashing “mini-budget” announced by the former British government on September 23 spooked the market amid rising concerns about the fiscal balance, mounting inflationary pressures, and the liquidity squeeze on UK pension funds. The yield on the 30-year gilt once surged to an all-time high of 5 percent since 1998, and the British pound once collapsed to a historic low, trading near parity with the dollar. Market turmoil forced the Bank of England (BOE) to suspend the planned start of its gilt selling and to temporarily begin buying long-dated UK government bonds, as announced on September 28th. In the meantime, driven by risk aversion and other factors, the US dollar strengthened markedly. The US Dollar Index rose above 114, the euro fluctuated around its parity against the US dollar, and the Japanese yen depreciated to 140 yen per dollar in September and further to 150 yen per dollar in October. The Japanese government intervened in the foreign exchange market for the first time in 24 years after the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis. In the bond market, the 10-year Treasury yield was close to 4 percent in late September, and it rose to above 4.2 percent in late October, while the yield on 10-year government bonds in the UK, France, and Germany all jumped above 2 percent in Q3. Oil prices dropped notably from their elevated levels, with the Brent futures falling by 21.6 percent in Q3.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major advanced economies continued with their policy tightening. The Federal Reserve (Fed) hiked the federal funds rate in July, September, and November, each by 75 basis points (bps), to a target range of 3.75–4 percent. In its September dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2022 was 4.25–4.5 percent, which means a total hike of 425 bps this year, way higher than the forecast in the June dot plot. After the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met in November, Fed Chair Powell noted that the ultimate level of interest rates would be higher than previously expected, but in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, the Fed will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation. In addition, beginning in June the Fed began to reduce the size of its balance sheet. In September, the Fed increased the monthly cap for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to USD60 billion and USD35 billion, respectively. The European Central Bank increased the interest rate on its main refinancing operations, marginal lending facility, and deposit facility each by 50 bps in July, its first rate hike in eleven years. It then raised the three key interest rates again in September and October, each by 75 bps to 2 percent, 2.25 percent, and 1.5 percent, respectively. In the meantime, it created the Transmission Protection Instrument to ensure smooth transmission of monetary policy across the euro area so as to meet the objective of maintaining price stability. The BOE raised the Bank Rate in August and September, each by 50 bps. It also decided to reduce its total gilt holdings by GBP80 billion over a 12-month period. However, market turmoil at the end of September forced the BOE to suspend bond selling and to conduct temporary bond-buying operations. The planned bond selling was resumed on November 1st. The Bank of Japan maintained a loose monetary policy and the yield curve control. It kept the 10-year government bond yield near zero and would continue to buy 10-year government bonds at 0.25 percent every business day. In September, for the first timein years the Bank of Japan intervened in the foreign exchange market to stem the fall of the yen. Among the other central banks, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Bank of Korea raised rates by a total of 175 bps, 150 bps, 100 bps, and 75 bps, respectively. Some emerging economies continued to raise interest rates. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the spillovers from monetary policy tightening in the advanced economies, some emerging economies continued with their rate hikes. In Q3, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas hiked the rate three times, by a total of 175 bps. The central banks in South Africa, Mexico, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand all increased their rates twice by a total of 150 bps, 150 bps, 100 bps, 75 bps, 50 bps, and 50 bps, respectively. For Indonesia and Thailand, it was their first rate hike after the outbreak of COVID-19. The Central Bank of Brazil raised the rate once by 50 bps. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention High inflation remains a grim challenge. Inflation keeps hitting record highs in the advanced economies. There is a sign of a marginal decline in the US CPI, but the easing of its core CPI has been limited. As rent, transportation, recreation, and other items in the CPI basket may still create upward pressures on prices, US inflation remains sticky. Studies have shown that calculated on a comparable basis, the peaks in US inflation this time around are close to those during the Great Inflation of the 1970s and 1980s. Other advanced economies have not yet seen any signs of falling inflation. Furthermore, in some Asian emerging economies where inflation has remained subdued, prices are increasing at a faster pace. Therefore, global inflation is likely to remain high in the short run. The implications of high inflation for global economic activities will play out over time. It may hamper an economic recovery and widen the gap between the rich and the poor. In addition, the effectiveness of simply counting on monetary policy to contain inflation has become a key challenge for the advanced economies. Policy synergy among fiscal policy, structural reforms, international coordination, and open trade is urgently needed more than ever to make improvements on the supply side. Policymakers should be on high alert to the risk of a broader recession. Since the beginning of the year, the global economy has been under persistent pressure from the monetary policy tightening of the advanced economies, geopolitical tensions, energy shortages, and high inflation. The cumulative tightening effects may be larger than expected. Historically, the US experienced seven rate hike cycles since the late 1970s, and the US economy headed into recession during five of them, either when the Fed was still raising the rate or after it finished the rate hikes. Many international organizations have already revised downward their global growth forecasts for 2022 and 2023. The IMF predicted that 31 economies, or 43 percent of the 72 economieswith a quarterly growth forecast, would enter a technical recession this year and next. These economies combined account for one-third of global GDP. Potential risks from growing financial vulnerabilities should not be overlooked. On the one hand, tighter liquidity has amplified financial market adjustments. Rate hikes by the major advanced economies, coupled with a stronger dollar, have increased the volatility of overseas asset prices. There is a liquidity squeeze on government bond markets in the advanced economies, and home prices have shown signs of a retreat. Non-bank financial institutions, such as pension funds, insurance firms, hedge funds, and in particular financially vulnerable market players, are feeling increasing pressures. On the other hand, risk aversion has increased the volatility of cross-border capital flows. As capital flows back to the US and other major advanced economies, capital outflows come under mounting pressures in other economies, particularly the emerging economies. Those with elevated levels of external debt are facing bigger debt servicing burdens. The risk of uncertainties in global financial markets has increased markedly. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In the first three quarters of 2022, in the face of the complicated and serious international situation and the impact of multiple factors exceeding expectations, pandemic containment and economic and social development in all regions and departments across the country were coordinated in an effective way, with an acceleration in the implementation of a package of policy measures and follow-up measures. China’s economy withstood the downward pressures and continued to rebound. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in the first three quarters stood at RMB87.0269 trillion, growing by 3.0 percent year on year on a comparable basis, an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points from H1. 1. Consumption improved, investments remained stable with a moderate increase, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth. The increase in residents’ income kept pace with economic growth, and consumption improved. In the first three quarters, the country’s per capita disposable income reached RMB27650, an increase of 5.3 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 3.2 percent in real terms. The growth of rural residents’ income outpaced that of urban residents’, and the structure of income distribution continuously improved. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q3, 22.8 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” down 1.0 percentage point from Q2. In the first three quarters, total retail sales of consumer goods grew by 0.7 percent year on year, and the growth rate moved from negative to positive. Consumption of basicliving items saw sound growth and retail sales of grain, oil, food, and beverages by enterprises (units) above the designated size increased by 9.1 percent and 6.9 percent, respectively. Investments remained stable and saw a moderate increase, and the structure continued to improve. In the first three quarters, national fixed-asset investments (excluding those by rural households) increased by 5.9 percent year on year to RMB42.1412 trillion. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 10.1 percent, 4.2 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure increased by 8.6 percent, 2.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in real estate decreased by 8.0 percent. Investments in high-tech industry grew by 20.2 percent year on year, 14.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Social investments grew by 13.2 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in health and education grew by 31.2 percent and 8.1 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports grew rapidly. In the first three quarters, imports and exports of goods grew by 9.9 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 13.8 percent year on year and imports grew by 5.2 percent year on year, with the surplus of trade in goods posting RMB4.23 trillion, up by 53.7 percent year on year. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share of imports and exports under general trade increasing by 2.1 percentage points year on year and accounting for 64.0 percent of the total imports and exports. Exports of machinery and electronics and labor-intensive products increased by 10.0 percent and 12.7 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 56.8 percent and 18 percent of total imports and exports. Our trading partners are becoming more diversified. Imports from and exports to countries along the Belt and Road and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) trading partners grew by 20.7 percent and 15.2 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In the first three quarters, actually utilized FDI increased by 15.6 percent year on year to RMB1.00376 trillion (equivalent to USD153.3 billion, representing growth of 18.9 percent year on year). In terms of sectors, FDI in the high-tech industry and the services industry grew rapidly. In the first three quarters, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 32.3 percent year on year. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 48.6 percent year on year and actually utilized FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 27.9 percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the services industry grew by 6.7 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production was stable, industrial production recovered rapidly, and the service industry continued to recoverIn the first three quarters, the value-added of the primary industry totaled RMB5.4779 trillion, up 4.2 percent year on year, and the value-added of the secondary industry totaled RMB35.0189 trillion, up 3.9 percent year on year, and the value-added of the tertiary industry totaled RMB46.53 trillion, up 2.3 percent year on year. Agricultural production was favorable, and animal husbandry grew steadily. In the first three quarters, the value-added of agriculture (farming) increased by 3.8 percent year on year. The output of summer grains totaled 175.53 million tons, up 1.55 million tons from 2021, increasing by 0.9 percent year on year. The sowing area of autumn grains was stable with a slight rise, and a bumper harvest was expected. In the first three quarters, output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 4.4 percent year on year; in particular, output of pork grew by 5.9 percent year on year. At end-Q3, the number of hogs in stock increased by 1.4 percent year on year. The recovery of industrial production was accelerated, with the equipment manufacturing and high-tech manufacturing industries developing rapidly. In the first three quarters, the value-added of industrial enterprises above a designated size (IEDS) increased by 3.9 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points from H1. Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 8.5 percent year on year. The manufacturing sector increased by 3.2 percent year on year. The electricity, heat, gas and water production and supply sectors increased by 5.6 percent year on year. The industrial structure was continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and equipment manufacturing sector increased by 8.5 percent and 6.3 percent year on year, respectively, 4.6 percentage points and 2.4 percentage points higher than the growth of the value-added of IEDS. The output of new energy cars and solar batteries grew by 112.5 percent and 33.7 percent year on year, respectively. The service industry continued to recover, and growth of the modern service industry was favorable. In the first three quarters, the value-added of the services industry grew by 2.3 percent year on year. Specifically, the value-added of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services and the financial sector grew by 8.8 percent and 5.5 percent year on year, respectively. In Q3, the value-added of the services industry grew by 3.2 percent year on year, changing from negative to positive. In the first three quarters, the Index of Service Production (ISP) increased by 0.1 percent year on year. In particular, the ISP increased by 1.3 percent year on year in September. The Business Activities Expectation Index for the service industry reached 48.9 percent. Specifically, the Business Activities Index for postal services, telecommunications/broadcasting/television and satellite transmission services, and monetary and financial services were all within a prosperous rangeabove 60.0 percent. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and the growth of producer prices continued to decelerate Consumer prices increased moderately. In the first three quarters, the CPI increased by 2.0 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.3 percentage points from H1. The core CPI (food and energy excluded) increased by 0.9 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.1 percentage points from H1. Specifically, the CPI in July, August, and September increased by 2.7 percent, 2.5 percent, and 2.8 percent, respectively. Pork prices have been in an uptrend, increasing by 26.2 percent year on year in Q3 and driving up food prices by 7.1 percent year on year, an acceleration of 4.7 percent from Q2. The drop in the prices of raw materials, associated with the suppression of demand due to COVID-19, led to a deceleration in the growth of non-food prices. In Q3, non-food prices increased by 1.7 percent year on year, declining by 0.6 percentage points from Q2. The growth of producer prices continued to decelerate. In the first three quarters, the producer price index (PPI) increased by 5.9 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1.8 percentage points from H1. Specifically, the PPI in July, August, and September increased by 4.2 percent, 2.3 percent, and 0.9 percent, respectively. Due to the drop in international crude oil prices and other commodity prices associated with the base effects, the year-on-year increase in the PPI decreased month by month. In the first three quarters, the purchasing price index for industrial products (PPIRM) increased by 8.3 percent year on year, a deceleration of 2.1 percentage points from H1. In the first three quarters, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC increased by 4.7 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1.2 percentage points from H1 and a deceleration of 1.7 percentage points from the same period of last year. 4. Fiscal revenue stabilized and rebounded, and the effects of support for stabilizing the economy and ensuring the people’s livelihood have emerged In the first three quarters, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB15.3 trillion, increasing by 4.1 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), and decreasing by 6.6 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 3.0 percent and 5.2 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), respectively, and decreased by 8.6 percent and 4.9 percent (calculated on a natural basis), respectively. Tax revenue posted RMB12.4 trillion, an increase of 1.0 percent (VAT credit refund excluded). In the first three quarters, expenditures in the national general budget posted RMB19.0 trillion, increasing by 6.2 percent year on year and accelerating by 3.9percentage points from the same period of the previous year. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures related to science and technology and health grew quickly, increasing by 14 percent and 10.7 percent, respectively. 5. The employment situation was generally stable The surveyed urban unemployment rate fell. In the first three quarters, the national surveyed urban unemployment rate averaged 5.6 percent. In Q3, the national surveyed urban unemployment rate was 5.4 percent, decreasing by 0.4 percentage points from Q2. In September, the national surveyed urban unemployment rate was 5.5 percent, an increase of 0.2 percentage points from the previous month. Specifically, the surveyed unemployment rate among 25- to 59-year-olds was 4.7 percent, 0.8 percentage points lower than the national surveyed urban unemployment rate. In September, the unemployment rate among 16- to 24-year-olds was 17.9 percent, two percentage points lower than the peak in July, dropping for two consecutive months. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in China’s balance of payments. According to preliminary statistics, in the first three quarters, China’s current account surplus registered USD310.4 billion, an increase of 56 percent and accounting for 2.4 percent of GDP. Specifically, according to the balance of payments statistics, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD521.6 billion, an all-time record, and it increased by 37 percent year on year. Trade in services recorded a deficit of USD65.6 billion, down 23 percent year on year. Cross-border capital flows maintained a basic equilibrium. Specifically, direct investments recorded a surplus of USD46.9 billion. By the end of June, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.6360 trillion, with medium- and long-term foreign debt accounting for 46 percent. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In September 2022, among 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 2.3 percent and 3.5 percent year on year, respectively, down 1 percentage point and 0.8 percentage points respectively from June. In the first three quarters of 2022, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 22.2 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 26.3 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development fell by 8 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development fell by 7.5 percent year on year.At end-September 2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 3.2 percent year on year to RMB53.3 trillion. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 4.1 percent year on year to RMB38.9 trillion. Outstanding housing development loans dropped by 1.1 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion. 7.2 The online retail industry In recent years, driven by sci-tech innovation and consumption upgrades, online retail began to thrive upon further utilization of the Internet, cloud computing, and artificial intelligence. This propelled traditional retail businesses to accelerate their digital transition. In the midst of the pandemic, the development of online retail proved to be resilient, which helped unleash its potential and promote the sustained recovery of consumption. In 2021, the online sales of the top 100 chain retailers in China reached RMB470 billion, accounting for 20.6 percent of their total sales. In the first three quarters of 2022, online retail sales in China posted RMB9.59 trillion, up 4 percent year on year and 3.3 percentage points higher than the total retail sales of consumer goods during the same period; online retail sales of physical goods posted RMB8.24 trillion, up 6.1 percent year on year, constituting 25.7 percent of total retail sales of consumer goods, which were 2.1 percentage points higher than their share during the same period of last year; online retail sales of physical goods, food, clothing and other necessities grew by 15.6 percent, 4.7 percent, and 5.2 percent year on year, respectively. The online retail industry maintained steady growth, demonstrating strong resilience and new trends. First, live-streaming e-commerce flourished. In H1 2022, according to the monitoring of business big data, over 60 million live-streamings tookplace on major e-commerce platforms in China, receiving more than 517 billion views. Second, Guochao (a Chinese brand fad) encouraged new consumption. Spurred on by cultural confidence and consumption upgrading, both traditional and newly created Chinese local brands led consumer trends. In H1 2022, Chinese local brands held a high market share of 68.8 percent, and nine out of the top ten brands with the highest online sales were Chinese local brands. Third, sales of upgraded consumption goods continued to grow at a fast pace. Major e-commerce platforms and businesses actively replaced the older generations of products with new ones, featuring growing demand for glamping items, winter sports, and green household appliances. In H1 2022, the sales of jewelry and skiing equipment increased by 39 percent and 72.7 percent year on year, respectively; the sales of energy-saving central air-conditioning, energy-saving freezers, and energy-saving water heaters rose by 124 percent, 33.8 percent, and 27.2 percent year on year, respectively. Fourth, new industries and new business forms mushroomed in rural areas. As e-commerce and logistics distribution penetrated the rural areas, rural e-commerce systems continued to improve, with more than 30,000 agriculture-related e-commerce businesses operating in China. In the first three quarters of 2022, online retail sales in rural areas totaled RMB1.49785 trillion, up 3.6 percent year on year; online retail sales of agricultural products reached RMB374.51 billion, up 8.8 percent year on year. Driven by constant improvements in the market environment and growing personalized demand, new models and new business forms of consumption, characterized by the integration of online and offline channels, developed at a faster pace, bringing both opportunities and challenges to the online retail industry. Moving forward, following the requirements in the 14th Five-Year Plan for E-Commerce Development, the relevant parties should make synergistic efforts to break through the bottlenecks that restrict consumption and promote high-quality development of the industry in the following respects:. The first is to promote the development of smart retail. Traditional retailers are encouraged to engage in online retail via their own platforms or via third-party platforms so as to augment the brand effect and product value. The second is to accelerate the upgrading of business infrastructure toward intelligence. The digitized supply chain must be improved with higher delivery efficiency. Adopting demand-oriented approaches, resources are to be channeled more rapidly into new consumption scenarios, such as instant retail, contactless consumption, and live streaming retail. The third is to enhance the application of technology and innovations in business forms and models. Technologies including artificial intelligence, big data, and the Internet of Things should be fully tapped into in a way that guides production factors into new business forms and models. The fourth is to improve the business environment in a continuous manner. Protection of users’ privacy and workers’ legitimate rights and interests needs to be strengthened as does the evaluation system for new consumption businesses, the protection of intellectual property rights, and the construction of supporting systems. In the online retail market, a fair, impartial, and open environment for competition should be formed to boost new consumption.Part 5 Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy In Q3, the Chinese economy rebounded significantly, showing an overall trend of recovery and positive outlook. In Q3, China’s GDP registered year-on-year growth of 3.9 percent, 3.5 percentage points higher than that in Q2. The benefits of a package of policies and follow-up measures for stabilizing the economy were continuously unleashed. Agricultural production remained stable, and autumn grain production was expected to witness a bumper harvest. Industrial production bounced back swiftly, with market confidence enhanced. Household income growth was in line with economic growth, and consumption expenditures were recovering, with sound growth of sales in upgraded green products such as new energy automobiles. Business investment activities were overall improved and construction of major projects was accelerated. External trade maintained rapid growth, as net exports of goods and services contributed 1.1 percentage points to economic growth in Q3, making positive contribution to stabilizing the macro economy. Employment was generally stable, the average urban surveyed unemployment rate in Q3 dropped by 0.4 percentage points from the previous quarter. The capacity to ensure energy supply was constantly enhanced, while the proportion of non-fossil energy consumption was continuously elevated. Meanwhile, it should be noted that the current external environment has become more severe and complicated, with elevated overseas inflation and increasing risks of a global economic downturn, and the foundation for domestic economic recovery is not solid yet. On the one hand, inflation in the advanced economies remains sticky, and their tightening monetary policy stance may continue for the short run. As the momentum of global economic recovery weakens, the IMF has recently again lowered its 2023 global economic growth forecast by 0.2 percentage points to 2.7 percent. On the other hand, consumption recovery is constrained by the increase in precautionary savings by domestic households, and effective investment expansions are facing multiple constraints such as insufficient returns, while medium- and long-term challenges such as the aging of the population and the low-carbon transition cannot be neglected. However, it should be noted that factors and conditions for establishing a new development paradigm are sufficient, with a recovery of effective demand gaining momentum, and the economy being resilient, promising, and energetic. The fundamentals for China’s sound economic growth over the long run remain unchanged. We should maintain a strategic focus and concentrate on accomplishing our own tasks. We need to comprehensively implement the requirements for “preventing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and ensuringsafe development,” and well coordinate pandemic containment and socio-economic development. We need to make sure that the package of policies and follow-up measures to stabilize the economy will be well implemented and will take effect so as to vigorously promote high-quality development. Price increases are generally moderate, but we should be alert to pressures from a rebounding of inflation. In Q3, pork, vegetables, and other food prices increased rather rapidly, while prices of travel, accommodations, and other services affected by Covid-19 experienced a lower increase than in previous years, leading to a mild rise in the overall CPI. Meanwhile, as prices of commodities, such as international crude oil decreased amid fluctuations, growth of the PPI continued to decrease and in October fell into negative territory on a year-on-year basis. The PPI increase is expected to remain at a low level during the year. Looking to the future, aggregate supply and demand are generally balanced in the Chinese economy, monetary policy remains sound, industrial and supply chains are operating smoothly, and household inflation expectations are stable, providing favorable conditions for maintaining generally stable price levels. In the meantime, we should pay close attention to the possibility of rising inflation in the future. At present, geopolitical conflicts are still disrupting global energy supplies and high inflation in advanced economies remains sticky. Therefore, external pressures of imported inflation still exist. For a period of time, M2 growth has remained relatively elevated in China. If aggregate demand recovers further, this could lead to a lagged effect. In winter, vigorous demand for pork and heating, the shifting calendar date of the Spring Festival, and other factors, especially more precise pandemic containment measures, could swiftly unleash consumption momentum and increase short-run structural inflationary pressures. We should keep a close eye on price movements, strengthen monitoring and analysis, and be alert to prospective pressures of a rebound of inflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will follow the guidelines of the 20th CPC National Congress, make efforts to build a high-level socialist market economy, and press ahead with Chinese-style modernization. Following the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will pursue progress while taking stability as its top priority. The PBC will deepen the financial system reform and develop a modern central banking system. With solid implementation of policies, it will aim to maintain employment and price stability and it will leverage the key role of effective investments so as to consolidate and amplify economic momentum upwards, and effectively upgrade and appropriately expand the economic output.The PBC will strengthen implementation of a sound monetary policy. With proper intertemporal adjustments, it will balance short-term and long-term perspectives, economic growth and price stability, as well as internal and external equilibria. It will resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies, and it will not provide an excessive money supply. With these efforts, the PBC will provide stronger and higher-quality support for the real economy. While keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, the PBC will guide policy and development banks to make full and effective use of the policy-based and development-orientedfinancial instruments as well as the newly added RMB800 billion of credit lines. Encouraging commercial banks to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth of M2 and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) so as to achieve better economic performance. Paying high attention to the potential rise in inflation, especially demand-side changes, the PBC will continue its efforts to consolidate favorable conditions for stable and growing domestic grain production and for the smooth functioning of the energy market. With proper preparations and management, it will keep prices basically stable. It will render more support to key areas, weak links, as well as to those businesses and industries that have been hard hit by COVID-19, by making good use of the inclusive MSB lending facilities, the carbon emissions reduction facility (CERF), as well as central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use, for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, for transportation and logistics, and for equipment upgrading and renovation. The PBC will ensure solid implementation of the long-term mechanism for boosting the confidence, willingness, capacity, and professionalism of financial institutions to lend to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and private businesses so as to spur the vitality of market entities. It will continue its efforts to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform and to optimize the central bank policy rate system. The mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates will play a key role and it will contribute to stabilizing the liability costs for banks. The costs for corporate financing and for consumer credit are expected to drop, with the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuing to unleash its potential. The PBC will pay close attention to economic developments in the developed economies as well as to the spillover effects of their monetary policy shifts, and it will focus on domestic issues while properly balancing internal and external equilibria. Pursuing a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies and upholding the decisive role of the market in exchange rate formation, the PBC will maintain bottom-line thinking and strengthen expectation management so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will coordinate efforts for economic development and risk prevention to maintain overall stability in the financial system. It will establish and improve the mechanism for risk prevention, early warning, and resolution, and it will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur so as to safeguard the interests of the people.First, the PBC will maintain stable and appropriate growth in money and credit. By using a mix of monetary policy tools, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and maintain reasonable growth in money supply and the AFRE, striving to create a favorable liquidity environment for consolidating the economic recovery and maintaining the stable functioning of the market at year-end. Closely following economic and financial developments both at home and abroad as well as changes in the monetary policy stances of the major economies, it will make in-depth analyses of liquidity supply and demand and financial market developments, and it will conduct open market operations (OMOs) in a flexible manner so as to improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of the operations, to stabilize market expectations and to properly balance internal and external equilibria. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, continue to ease liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on the supply of bank credits, and guide financial institutions to step up credit support for the real economy in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. With policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments in place and the newly increased RMB800 billion quota of credit put into use, financing support will be directed toward infrastructure construction. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment by replenishing capital of commercial banks through multiple channels and ramping up support for small and medium-sized banks in their issuance of perpetual bonds and other capital replenishment instruments, thereby improving the capacity of banks to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will use structural monetary policy tools in a focused, reasonable, appropriate, and flexible manner. It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable and it will continue to provide inclusive and sustainable funding support to agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private businesses. It will push for better implementation of the inclusive MSB lending facilities and maintain financial support for MSBs so that they can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and securing employment. At the same time, the PBC will put into operation the CERF and the special central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use in support of carbon emissions reduction in a scientific and orderly manner. It will encourage eligible financial institutions to provide funding at preferential interest rates to key projects that significantly reduce carbon emissions, and it will guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development based on market principles. Moreover, the PBC will support clean and efficient use of coal and coal-fired power. It will promote the transition to a green and low-carbon economy on the basis of security in the supply of energy so as to help achieve the goals of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality by scientific and well-ordered steps. The PBC will continue to implement the special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for transportation and logistics, and it will pick up pace inimplementing the special central bank lending for equipment upgrading and renovation, leveraging the role of the special central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. More work will be done to concretely implement those financial policies that have already been introduced. The PBC will continue to encourage financial institutions to defer interest and principal payments for qualified loans and it will assess the effectiveness of the MSB credit policy orientation. It will urge and guide financial institutions to accelerate the establishment of the long-term mechanism for boosting the confidence, willingness, capacity, and professionalism of financial institutions to lend to MSBs so as to improve and facilitate MSB access to financing. Aiming at promoting rural revitalization on all fronts, the PBC will guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, promote innovations in financial products and services, and effectively ramp up financial support for the agricultural sector, rural areas, and farmers. The PBC will adopt a mix of policy measures to enhance the role of policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments in speeding up construction and in ensuring payments for key projects, with follow-up funding support put in place. With these efforts, more projects are expected to deliver concrete progress. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance. Meanwhile, it will adopt city-specific measures and use the policy toolkit fully and effectively to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions. The special lending facility to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects will be put in place at a quickened pace and policy strength will be increased as appropriate. Commercial banks will also be guided to provide follow-up funding support. The PBC will protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers and promote the stable and healthy development of the real estate market. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms, and it will focus on domestic conditions while balancing internal and external equilibria. It will continue to improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and the central bank policy rate system. It will strengthen regulation of deposit rates and give full play to the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments to stabilize bank liability costs. Moreover, it will continue to tap into the LPR reform to help bring down the overall financing costs for businesses and the consumer credit costs for individuals. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve themanaged floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. Sticking to the decisive role of the market in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, the PBC will also enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, strengthen expectation management, and uphold bottom-line thinking, while conducting monitoring and analysis of cross-border capital flows and stressing risk prevention. By doing so, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and give play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. In addition, the PBC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market. Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. Moreover, the PBC will continue to advance RMB internationalization in an orderly manner by further expanding use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepening international monetary cooperation, and promoting the development of offshore RMB markets. It will run pilot programs for a high-level opening-up of cross-border investment and trade, further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account. Fifth, the PBC will make continued efforts to deepen the financial reform and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. The reform of development and policy financial institutions will move ahead, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities so as to better play their roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBC will strive to improve the legal system for the bond market and consolidate the legal basis for corporate credit bonds. Moreover, the PBC will accelerate the setting up of a multi-tiered bond market system, continue to expand the pilot program for financial bond balance management and macro-prudential management, and promote development of the over-the-counter (OTC) bond market in a bid to provide small and medium-sized financial institutions with diversified channels for bond investment transactions, custody, settlement, etc., and to increase bond market liquidity. The PBC will work to improve the bond underwriting and market-making mechanism, enhance the interconnectivity between the primary and secondary markets, and boost the effectiveness and transmission efficiency of bond pricing. Adhering to market principles and the rule of law, it will continue to adopt a zero-tolerance approach by stepping up efforts to crack down on illegal and irregular conduct in the bond market. At the same time, the PBC will remain firmly committed to advancing the opening-up of the bond market. Sixth, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC will strengthen the financial legal system. With the drafting of the Law on Financial Stability and the establishment of the Financial Stability Fund, it will further improve and consolidate the long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution, aiming to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is based on market principles and the rule of law. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential policy framework as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning and to enrich the macro-prudential policy tools. The PBC will improve regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will urge systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. At the same time, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve their total loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention ability. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate financial holding companies, and the relevant regulatory system will be continuously enhanced. The PBC will move ahead steadily to implement the requirement that non-financial enterprises which fall under the prescribed circumstances should apply for the establishment of financial holding companies according to the law so as to promote the sound, well-regulated, and sustainable development of financial holding companies. The PBC will go to great lengths to improve the effectiveness of regulation, reinforce prudential regulation, and conduct regulation of the financial sector on an on-going basis and strengthen protection of consumers and investors. Furthermore, the PBC will keep a close watch on risks in key fields. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it will attach importance to preventing and defusing financial risks in order to reduce existing risks and strictly guard against emerging risks. Additionally, the PBC will further tap into the functions of deposit insurance for early corrections and risk resolution, leverage the role of risk-differentiated premiums as both incentives and restraints, and enhance the authority of early corrections. Continued efforts will be made to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement corresponding measures. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards. It will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. Part 1 Money and Credit Analysis In 2022, the Chinese economy was hit by multiple unexpected factors, including COVID-19 and developments in the international situation. To be specific, pressures of shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakening expectations evolved, international geopolitical conflicts escalated, and the downside risks to the world economy increased, increasing uncertainties in the development environment. Against this backdrop, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and implemented the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. It placed stable growth in a more prominent position, strengthened implementation of a sound monetary policy, and gave full play to the guiding role of structural monetary policy instruments. As a result, money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) witnessed reasonable growth, the credit structure was improved continuously, and overall financing costs steadily declined, providing vigorous support for stabilizing the macro economy and creating a favorable economic and financial environment for the convening of 20th CPC National Congress. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In 2022, the PBOC adopted a monetary policy prioritizing stability while pursuing development, and it took prompt measures at an early stage based on the dynamics of the macro situation. It employed a mix of instruments, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs) to inject liquidity into the economy. The PBOC cut the RRR by 0.25 percentage points in April and December, respectively, releasing a total of over RMB1 trillion in long-term liquidity. It turned over RMB1.13 trillion in surplus profits to the central budget, providing additional available funds equivalent to a sweeping RRR cut of 0.5 percentage points to the economy. The PBOC also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner, and it brought down interest rates in the money market, creating a favorable liquidity environment for keeping economic performance within a reasonable range. At end-2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 2.0 percent, indicating that liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level.Box 1 The PBOC Turns Over Surplus Profits to Facilitate Stable Growth In 2022, following the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBOC turned over RMB1.13 trillion in surplus profits to the central budget in accordance with the law, which were primarily used for tax refunds and transfer payments to local governments, thus providing relief to businesses, stabilizing employment, and protecting the people’s livelihood. These funds played an important role in stabilizing the macro economy. The PBOC made proper profits and transferred them to the central budget to enhance financial support for high-quality development, which can mainly be attributable to a sound monetary policy and a prudential financial budget system. In recent years, China has adhered to a sound monetary policy and it has maintained adequate room for policy maneuvers, making it possible for the PBOC to make stable profits. Currently, its profits mainly come from operational revenue by investing foreign exchange reserves in international financial markets in a market-based manner. The PBOC has pursued a sound monetary policy which seeks progress while giving top priority to stability and avoiding great volatility. As a result, its balance sheet has remained basically stable, with interest rate revenues and expenditures of monetary policy operations balanced, making it possible for the PBOC to make stable profits. In contrast, some major central banks across the globe have purchased large quantities of government bonds in response to the shocks of COVID-19, remarkably expanding their balance sheets. Under these circumstances,the surging interest rates will have implications for the balance sheets of the central banks and their financial conditions. After writing off historical costs, the PBOC turned over all surplus profits to the central budget in accordance with the law in 2022. Disclosure of this move demonstrated great improvement in financial transparency. The PBOC bore the costs of financial institutional reforms, such as the joint-stock reforms of state-owned commercial banks and rural credit cooperatives, which should be written off from its revenues. Over the past ten-odd years, it has been committed to absorbing these historical costs with part of its profits, and in most years it has turned over profits to the central budget. After years of unremitting efforts, the PBOC managed to write off all historical costs before turning over all surplus profits to the central budget in accordance with the law. This manifested coordination between monetary and fiscal policies to stabilize the macro economy, while announcement of the move demonstrated material improvements in the financial transparency of the PBOC as a modern central bank, which is conducive to cementing a financial foundation for a modern central bank system. In the process of turning over profits, the PBOC has maintained a sound and sustainable balance sheet, so the move will result neither in a government overdraft nor monetization of fiscal deficits. Instead of seeking maximum profits, a central bank is mandated to keep currency stable and to maintain financial stability so as to serve the public interest. A sound and sustainable balance sheet is the cornerstone of a central bank’s implementation of a monetary policy, maintaining financial stability, and enhancing financial services. It will not only make it credible that a central bank can keep currency stable and inflation under control, but also it will ensure that the bank can function as the “lender of last resort” and firmly support the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. In the next stage, the PBOC will, following the guidelines of the 20th CPC National Congress, establish a central bank system with Chinese characteristics, push forward the independent financial- budget management system, continuously improve accounting standards, replenish central bank reserves and capital, and implement a prudential asset loss provision system so as to ensure a sound and sustainable balance sheet. With these efforts, the PBOC can fulfill its missions in accordance with the law, keep currency stable, and maintain financial stability, thereby promoting full employment and economic growth. II. Lending by financial institutions grew rapidly, and lending rates remained at historic lows. Credit support for the real economy was strengthened. Since the beginning of Q2, due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the downward pressures on the economy,enterprises, especially micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), have been faced with increasing difficulties in business operations. For a period of time, their demands for credit waned and the growth of loans slowed down. In response, the PBOC has successively held a number of symposia to analyze the monetary and credit situations, attended by the heads of major financial institutions, the PBOC branches at various levels and its affiliated institutions as well as policy banks. Financial institutions, especially large state-owned commercial banks as well as policy and development banks, were urged to play a pillar role and to increase lending based on prudent operations and in line with market-based principles. In the second half of 2022, with the implementation of a package of policy measures to stabilize the economy and with the optimization of pandemic containment measures, credit demand improved marginally. The PBOC has guided policy and development banks to launch policy-backed and development-oriented financial instruments in the amount of RMB739.9 billion, making effective use of the newly increased credit line of RMB800 billion. Financial institutions were encouraged to extend credit with reasonable intensity and at an appropriate pace in line with market-based principles so as to consolidate credit support for the real economy. Throughout the year, RMB loans witnessed larger year-on-year growth and financial support continued to increase. At end-2022, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 10.4 percent year on year to RMB219.1 trillion, increasing RMB20.6 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB496.9 billion. Outstanding RMB loans grew 11.1 percent year on year to RMB214.0 trillion, up RMB21.3 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion. Loans grew by RMB8.3 trillion, RMB5.3 trillion, RMB4.4 trillion, and RMB3.2 trillion in each of the four quarters of 2022, respectively. The quarterly increments accounted for 39.1 percent, 25.1 percent, 20.7 percent, and 15.1 percent, respectively, which were basically flat with those in the previous year. The credit structure has been improving. At end-2022, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB11.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022, accounting for 64.7 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year (YOY) growth rate of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 36.7 percent, 25.6 percentage points higher than that of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 23.8 percent year on year, 12.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total loans; 56.52 million MSBs were supported, a rise of 26.8 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rate of loans hit a statistical low. The PBOC continuously deepened the market-oriented interest rate reform, tapping into the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and bringing into play the key role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates so as to further bring down the actual lending rates. In December 2022, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.65 percent and 4.30 percent, respectively, down 0.15 percentage points and 0.35 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. In December, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.14 percent, down 0.62 percentage points year on year.In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.57 percent, down 0.62 percentage points year on year, while the weighted average interest rate on corporate loans fell by 0.60 percentage points year on year to 3.97 percent.In December, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 56.21 percent, 5.52 percent, and 38.27 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In December 2022, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 1.20 percent and 3.66 percent, respectively, up 1.1 and 3.35 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six months registered 5.03 percent and 4.99 percent, up 3.92 and 3.88 percentage points from December 2021, respectively.Deposits grew significantly. At end-2022, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies at all financial institutions increased 10.8 percent year on year to RMB264.4 trillion, up RMB25.9 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB5.6 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 11.3 percent year on year to RMB258.5 trillion, an increase of RMB26.3 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB6.6 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD853.9 billion, USD143.0 billion less than that at the beginning of 2022. The decrease was USD250.7 billion more as compared with the previous year.III. Money supply and the AFRE grew at a reasonable pace Money and credit aggregates grew at a reasonable pace. At end-2022, outstanding broad money M2, narrow money M1, and currency in circulation M0 registered RMB266.4 trillion, RMB67.2 trillion, and RMB10.5 trillion, respectively, up 11.8 percent, 3.7 percent, and 15.3 percent year on year, respectively. The entire year of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB1.4 trillion, RMB733.4 billion more than that in 2021. The AFRE grew steadily. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB344.21 trillion at end-December and its year-on-year growth registered 9.6 percent. In 2022, the AFRE increment totaled RMB32.01 trillion, RMB668.9 billion more than that in 2021. The AFRE has the following structural features: first, RMB loans maintained reasonable growth. In 2022, the increment in RMB loans issued by financial institutions to the real economy grew by RMB974.6 billion year on year to RMB20.91 trillion, accounting for 65.3 percent of the AFRE increment during the same period. Second, compared with the previous year, the increment in government bonds grew while that in corporate bonds fell. The increment in government bonds increased by RMB107.4 billion year on year, while that in corporate bonds decreased by RMB1.24 trillion year on year. Third, off-balance-sheet financing decreased at a slower pace year on year. In 2022, the increase in entrusted loans was RMB527.5 billion more than that in 2021, while decreases in trust loans and undiscounted bankers’ acceptances were RMB1.41 trillion and RMB150.5 billion, respectively, less than the decreases in 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions decreased by a larger margin year on year, while loans written off remained basically flat year on year.Box 2 Pursuing a Sound Monetary Policy to Stabilize the Economy A stable currency is the cornerstone of stabilizing the economy, employment, and prices, and stability is a key requirement for implementing a sound monetary policy. From a counter-cyclical perspective, the macro economy is a non-interruptible continuous process, and the overarching priority of financial macro management is to stabilize an unstable economy. The goal of monetary policies is to smooth out fluctuations in total demand in economic operations and to protect production factors and social wealth from the damage caused by booms and busts. From an inter-temporal perspective, the strength of monetary policies should remain stable, and the central banks should refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies that may bring about excessive investment, debt escalation, asset bubbles, and a number of other problems. Moreover, central banks should take targeted measures to optimize the economic structure so as to increase the endogenous stability of the economy, to maintain long-term stable and sound economic development, and to practice the general principle of seeking progress while maintaining stability. As the macro economy and prices continue to remain stable, the expectations of economic entities, i.e., residents’ expectations of future income, enterprises’ expectations of future operations, and foreign investments’ expectations of economic and trade exchanges, will be more stable, which will help increase the certainty of a virtuous cycle between effective demand and effective supply, consumption and investment, as well as domestic demand and external demand. As a result, stability of the macro economy will be further enhanced and the goal of monetary policies to stabilize the economy can be achieved at a relatively low policy price. In the past five years, the PBOC, in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, has continually implemented a sound monetary policy, providing “stable” support for high-quality development. The five years have been extremely unusual and extraordinary as the world has confronted accelerated changes unseen in a century, with a far-reaching impact from the once-in-a-century pandemic and the intensified geographical conflicts. China is facing certain restraints in its efforts to further push up total factor productivity. The traditional economic growth drivers, such as labor and land, are losing steam, while the triple pressures from shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakening expectations have been mounting in recent years. Therefore, risks are on the rise in some areas, highlighting the importance of stability in the macro economy. In the face of the complex and severe domestic and international situations, China has implemented a sound monetary policy, prioritized stability, responded to change with stability, and maintained normal monetary policy space. The central bank refrains from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies when the economy goes down and it does not make a sharp turn when the economy recovers. Therefore, the PBOC responds to internal and external uncertainties with astable monetary policy, thus creating a favorable monetary and financial environment for stabilizing the macro economy. First, money and credit aggregates maintained steady growth, providing stable support for the real economy. Since 2018, the PBOC has cut the RRR 14 times to release long-term liquidity of over RMB11 trillion. It has also employed OMOs, MLFs, central bank lending, and other monetary policy instruments in a flexible manner to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The PBOC has worked to improve the mechanism for money supply management as its balance sheet remains basically stable so as to ensure an appropriate aggregate money supply. The average annual growth rate of M2 posted 9.5 percent from 2018 to 2022, which was generally in step with or slightly higher than the nominal economic growth rate of 7.8 percent during the corresponding period, providing strong support for economic operations within a reasonable range.Second, interest rate adjustments were made based on the domestic situation, and overall financing costs were steadily brought down. The PBOC cherished space for its normal monetary policy. It worked to guide a steady decline in actual loan rates by taking innovative measures to conduct the LPR reform and by improving the self-regulatory mechanism for market-based interest rate pricing. Facing the challenge of monetary policy tightening in the major developed economies, the PBOC, based on the principle that domestic development should be prioritized, refused to follow suit. On the contrary, it moderately guided the policy interest rate downwards in spite of the limited space for interest rate cuts to ensure that interest rates remained within a reasonable range and to meet the requirement for stabilizing domestic demand and employment in the first place. The obvious policy effect has been delivered, as the interest rate on corporate loans has decreased from a high of 5.60 percent in 2018 to 3.97 percent in December 2022, the interest rate on personal housing loans has decreased from 5.75 percent to 4.26 percent, and the interest rate oncorporate bonds has also decreased. All of this has effectively eased the debt burden on the real economy and has continuously stimulated effective financing demand.Third, the RMB exchange rate remained market-oriented and basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBOC has firmly upheld the decisive role of the market in resource allocation, and it has enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate. Meanwhile, the PBOC also guided and stabilized market expectations through market-based measures, withdrew from normal interventions, and improved a managed floating exchange-rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. In the past few years, the PBOC has carried out indirect management mainly through market-based policy measures, even when the pressure of exchange rate devaluation was mounting. In general, the movement of the RMB exchange rate has been determined by demand and supply in the foreign exchange market. Since 2019, affected by market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar “topped seven” three times, but it soon returned to below seven. In 2022, in the midst of the interest rate spikes in the developed economies, the US dollar index strengthened and the RMB weakened, which was completely market-driven. The PBOC has adopted an appropriate mix of monetary policy instruments, not only prioritizing domestic development but also ensuring the decisive role of the market in the exchange rate formation. At the same time, it has made efforts to stabilize expectations and to bring into play the role of the exchange rate as a stabilizer for macroeconomic management and as a buffer against external shocks, effectively responding to this round of external shocks and thus creating a favorable external market environment for the successful convening of the 20 th CPC National Congress and a stable macro economy. From a historical perspective, the RMB is a strong currency. The RMB exchange rate has appreciated nearly 20 percent against the US dollar and about 40 percent against a basket of currencies since the start of the exchange rate reform in 2005.The PBOC, based on “stability,” innovates and employs structural monetary policy instruments to gather “momentum” for high-quality development. As the Chinese economy gears toward high-quality development, both supply and demand face constraint, but the main contradiction lies on the supply side. Structural monetary policy instruments that are “focused, reasonable, moderate, and flexible” give play to their advantages in expanding the aggregate, optimizing the structural, and stabilizing the prices, aiming at both expanding domestic demand and optimizing supply, and helping to channel financial resources into key areas, such as micro and small businesses (MSBs), green development, and sci-tech innovation, in a bid to effectively upgrade and appropriately expand economic output and to inject new momentum into stabilizing the macro economy and pursuing high-quality development. In 2018, the PBOC led the launch of a “three-arrow” policy mix of credit, bonds, and equity, helping private enterprises out of their funding difficulties as all the funding channels were narrowing. In the wake of the outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020, the PBOC stepped up the efforts to support market entities from the supply side, launching central bank lending and central bank discounts in three stages in an amount of RMB300 billion, RMB500 billion, and RMB1 trillion, respectively. Interest rates were more market-based and policy coverage was becoming increasingly wide. Moreover, the PBOC introduced two instruments that could provide direct support for the real economy, i.e., the support instrument for deferred repayments of inclusive MSB loans and the support scheme for unsecured loans, both of which were later converted into the instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans so as to enhance funding support for MSBs. Since 2021, the PBOC has set up a carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coal, with the aim of promoting green development in a scientific and orderly manner; it has launched special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care services, the transport and logistics sectors, and equipment upgrading and renovation, strengthening targeted support for key areas; guided the launch of two batches of policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments with a total amount of RMB739.9 billion, leveraging effective infrastructure investment; introduced special loans to ensure delivery of residential buildings worth RMB350 billion and a support scheme for loans to guarantee property delivery in the amount of RMB200 billion, buttressing the sound operation of the real estate market. As of end-2022, the outstanding balance of structural monetary instruments posted RMB6.4 trillion, about 15 percent of the PBOC’s total assets. In general, the sound monetary policy has strongly promoted the achievement of an optimal mix of policy objectives, i.e., rapid social and economic development, full employment, and price stability. From 2018 to 2022, the average annual growth rate of China's GDP exceeded 5 percent, significantly higher than the global average, and the average annual increase in urban employment was over 12 million. In 2022,China's CPI rose by 2 percent year on year, far below the average global figure of more than 8 percent. Against the backdrop of elevated global inflation, prices remained basically stable. Average inflation rates in the CPI during the past five and ten years were both around 2 percent, achieving the long-term inflation target of 2 percent that has been pursued by the major economies. Moreover, residents' inflation expectations remained stable, laying a foundation to ensure price levels are kept generally stable in the medium and long terms.Going forward, the PBOC will, in accordance with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, continue to promote financial development with Chinese characteristics. It will implement the sound monetary policy in a precise and effective manner, maintain \appropriate growth of money and credit, steadily bring down overall financing costs, and bring into play the guiding and incentivizing role of structural monetary policy instruments. All these policy efforts will provide stable strategic support and gather momentum for high-quality economic development and they will contribute to realization of the Chinese path to modernization. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level In 2022, amid complicated changes in international economic and financial developments, the central banks of the major developed economies took swift actions to raise interest rates, and volatility in global foreign exchange markets intensified. The US dollar index fluctuated violently, hitting a 20-year high, but falling continuously starting in November. Major non-US dollar currencies also repeatedly hit 20-year lows. The RMB enjoyed relatively stable performance among the major global currencies, featuring two-way fluctuations and enhanced flexibility throughout the year, and it played a role as an auto stabilizer in macroeconomic management and in the balance of payments. The market plays a decisive role in the formation of theRMB exchange rate. Cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and market expectations have been stable on the whole. In 2022, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate depreciated against a basket of currencies. At end-2022, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) and the RMB Exchange Rate Index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 98.67 and 96.08, respectively, down 3.7 percent and 4.3 percent, respectively, from end-2021. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end-2021 to end-2022, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB depreciated 2.9 percent and 7.9 percent, respectively. From 2005 when the reform of the RMB exchange-rate formation regime began to December 2022, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated 44.2 percent and 45.6 percent, respectively. At end-2022, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.9646, depreciating 8.5 percent from end-2021 and appreciating 18.8 percent on a cumulative basis since the beginning of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005. In 2022, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.4 percent. In 2022, cross-border RMB settlements increased 15 percent year on year to RMB42.1 trillion, 49 percent of total annual cross-border settlements in RMB and foreign currencies. Specifically, RMB receipts and payments posted RMB20.5 trillion and RMB21.6 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 32 percent year on year to RMB10.5 trillion. In particular, RMB settlements under trade in goods registered RMB7.9 trillion, while RMB settlements under trade in services and under other items registered RMB2.6 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB31.6 trillion, increasing 10 percent year on year. In 2022, cross-border RMB settlements under trade in goods and under direct investment accounted for 18 percent and 70 percent of total annual cross-border settlements in RMB and foreign currencies, respectively, the highest level in recent years.Part 2 Monetary Policy Operations In Q4 2022, the PBOC studied and implemented the guiding principles of the 20th CPC National Congress, and, in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it fully implemented a package of policies and follow-up measures. It worked to keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, smooth liquidity supply at junctures such as year-end, guide steady growth of money and credit, scale up financial support for the real economy, especially for weak links and key areas, promote a steady decline in overall financing costs, and uphold the decisive role of the market in exchange rate formation. These efforts laid a solid foundation for the economy to stabilize and gain momentum. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. In Q4 2022, following the macroeconomic and financial situations at home and abroad, the PBOC injected medium and long-term liquidity by adopting a mix of tools, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), and central bank lending. In addition, the PBOC conducted open market operations on a daily basis, managed the intensity and pace of open market operations in a flexible and targeted manner in view of the demands of primary dealers, adjusted the maturities of operations to offset the impacts of temporary factors such as fiscal levies, government bond issuances, and liquidity fluctuations at year-end, thus keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. In mid-to-late December, responding to an increasing number ofCOVID-19 cases, the growing number of absences in financial institutions, and rising demand for precautionary funds, the PBOC preemptively pumped cross-year liquidity at an early stage. From December 19 to December 30, the PBOC injected a total of RMB1.73 trillion into the market via 7-day and 14-day reverse repos, averaging more than RMB200 billion daily in the last week, which effectively satisfied market demand and ensured ample liquidity at year-end as well as smooth movement of money market rates. In 2022, the rates of the open market 7-day reverse repos fell by 20 basis points after two cuts, which was conducive to boosting market confidence, bringing down overall financing costs, and providing strong support for the real economy. The annual weighted average rate of 7-day repos between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) posted 1.76 percent, a decrease of 41 basis points from 2021. Interest rates witnessed heightened stability at quarter-end and at year-end. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q4 2022, the PBOC conducted three batches of CBS operations, totaling RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. In 2022, the PBOC conducted CBS operations on a monthly basis, and these operations played a positive role in improving liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting banks, especially small and medium-sized banks to replenish capital through the issuance of perpetual bonds and in strengthening the capacity for credit supply. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q4 2022, the PBOC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. In 2022, the PBOC issued twelve batches of central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB 120 billion. The regular issuance of central bank bills in Hong Kong is conducive to promoting sound development of the offshore RMB money market and the bond market and to propelling both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and conduct RMB businesses in the offshore market. II. Conducting medium-term lending facility and standing lending facility operations Conducting MLF operations to fully meet market demand. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding roles of the medium-term policy rates, the PBOC conducted a total of RMB4.55 trillion of MLF operations in 2022, all with a maturity of one year. The interest rate registered 2.85 percent in the first seven months and 2.75 percent from August to December. In particular, the amount of MLF operations postedRMB1.2 trillion, RMB0.45 trillion, RMB0.9 trillion, and RMB2.0 trillion in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, respectively. At year-end, outstanding MLFs registered RMB4.55 trillion, which was on par with that at the beginning of 2022. Conducting standing lending facility (SLF) operations. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations, strengthen the stability of liquidity in the banking system, and prevent liquidity risks. In 2022, the PBOC conducted a total of RMB25.3 billion of SLF operations, of which operations in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 registered RMB6.4 billion, RMB2 billion, RMB2.2 billion, and RMB 14.7 billion, respectively. At year-end, outstanding SLF operations registered RMB12.3 billion. The SLF rate continued to serve as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, which helped maintain smooth operation of the money market. At end-2022, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.85 percent, 3.00 percent, and 3.35 percent, respectively, flat with those at the end of Q3. III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions Two rounds of RRR cuts for financial institutions were announced to bolster the real economy and promote a steady decline in overall financing costs. On April 25 and December 5, the PBOC reduced the RRR for financial institutions (excluding those that had already implemented an RRR of 5 percent), by 0.25 percentage points each time. To ramp up support for MSBs and agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, urban commercial banks conducting businesses within the province of registration and rural commercial banks implementing an RRR of over 5 percent enjoyed an additional RRR cut of 0.25 percentage points starting from the RRR cut in April. About RMB1.03 trillion of long-term funds were freed up by the two cuts in 2022. The required reserve ratio for foreign-currency deposits was lowered twice in 2022, and financial institutions were urged to enhance foreign exchange liquidity management. The PBOC lowered the required reserve ratio for foreign-currency deposits on May 15 and September 15, by 1 percentage point and 2 percentage points, respectively. The ratio declined from 9 percent to 6 percent after the two cuts, releasing around USD27 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. The risk reserve ratio for forward FX sales was raised in due course. In order to stabilize foreign exchange market expectations, the PBOC raised the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from zero to 20 percent, effective from September 28, 2022.IV. Further improving the macro-prudential system and the management framework Giving full play to the role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) in optimizing the credit structure and promoting the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In 2022, the PBOC further optimized the MPA framework and guided financial institutions to enhance stability in the growth of credit aggregates and to step up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector, and for green development. Raising the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing. On October 25, in order to further improve the unified macro-prudential management of cross-border financing, expand the source of cross-border funds for enterprises and financial institutions, and guide them to optimize their liability structure, the PBOC and State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) decided to raise, from 1 to 1.25, the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing of enterprises and financial institutions. Improving macro-prudential management practices of real estate finance. In 2022, the PBOC constantly improved macro-prudential management practices of real estate finance. It implemented the real estate loan concentration management system with proper intensity and at a proper pace and it refined arrangements for the transitional period. Eligible banking financial institutions were encouraged to issue real estate loans in a sound manner so as to better meet reasonable demands for housing financing. The PBOC also excluded loans for affordable rental housing projects from real estate loan concentration management to increase support for the development of affordable rental housing. Refining the regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions. The PBOC and CBIRC jointly solicited public opinions on the Assessment Methodology of Systemically Important Insurance Companies (Exposure Draft). The document stipulates the methods, coverage, procedures, and division of work to assess domestic systemically important insurance companies. On the basis of the size of their assets, the top ten largest insurance groups, life insurance companies, property and casualty insurance companies, and reinsurance companies were assessed based on four dimensions, i.e., size, interconnectedness, asset liquidation, and substitutability. On September 9, the PBOC and CBIRC released a list of China’s systemically important banks (SIBs) for 2022. A total of 19 banks were designated as SIBs based on 2021 statistics, consisting of 6 state-owned commercial banks, 9joint-stock commercial banks, and 4 city commercial banks. Implementing market access management and continuous regulation of financial holding companies (FHCs) in a sound and orderly manner. In 2022, the PBOC approved establishment of China CITIC Financial Holdings, Beijing Financial Holdings Group, and China Merchants Financial Holdings. The PBOC carried out all-round, continuous, and penetrating regulation over FHCs on a consolidated basis. It enhanced supervision of shareholders and of the ownership structure, and required FHCs to maintain adequate capital, improve corporate governance, strengthen risk isolation, enhance management of related-party transactions, and operate pursuant to the laws and regulations so as to achieve high-quality development. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policy instruments to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and weak links in the economy and coordinate regional development. Central bank lending to support rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand their credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to current regulations so as to consolidate the achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBOC promoted coordinated regional development by guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces to make effective use of policy instruments, such as central bank lending, and to expand credit supply for weak links within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private enterprises. More relief and assistance were provided for MSBs, and locally incorporated financial institutions were guided to employ central bank lending for MSBs and self-employed businesses that were heavily hit by COVID-19 so as to reduce their financing costs. To give play to the role of finance in supporting effective investments, the PBOC employed PSL to support the development banks and the policy banks in setting up financial instruments and providing credit support for key areas in the infrastructure sector. At end-2022, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB600.4 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.4171 trillion and RMB146.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB558.3 billion, while outstanding PSL posted RMB3.1528 trillion. Continuously implementing instruments supporting inclusive MSB loans to bolster the development of MSBs. In Q4, the PBOC provided incentive funding of RMB 6.16 billion to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increaseof RMB310.7 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Since implementation of this instrument, incentive funding from the PBOC to locally incorporated financial institutions totaled RMB27.46 billion, supporting a total increase of RMB1.6054 trillion in inclusive MSB loans. Implementing both the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal so as to support the green and low-carbon transition of the economy. In Q4, through these two instruments, the PBOC provided relevant financial institutions with RMB70.8 billion and RMB23.4 billion, respectively, or total funding of RMB94.2 billion. Since implementation of these two instruments, the PBOC cumulatively provided RMB309.7 billion and RMB81.1 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB390.8 billion. In order to maintain financial support for green development and energy supply guarantees, implementation of the CERF will be extended to end-2024, and implementation of the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal will be extended to end-2023. Accelerating implementation of special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, the transport and logistics sectors, and equipment upgrading and renovation, respectively. In Q4, through the aforementioned four instruments, the PBOC provided relevant financial institutions with central bank lending totaling RMB120 billion, RMB300 million, RMB13.9 billion, and RMB80.9 billion, respectively. Since implementation of these instruments, the PBOC issued cumulative funds totaling RMB200 billion, RMB700 million, RMB24.2 billion, and RMB80.9 billion, respectively. In order to enhance financial support for the smooth operation of transport and logistics, implementation of special central bank lending for transport and logistics will be extended until end-June 2023, and small and medium-sized logistics and storage enterprises will be added to the list of enterprises eligible for the instrument. Supporting financial institutions to temporarily reduce interest on inclusive MSB and toll-road loans. Following the decisions of the State Council executive meetings, the PBOC rolled out the policy of temporarily reducing interest on inclusive MSB loans in November 2022 and the toll-road loan facility in January 2023. Relevant financial institutions were supported to reduce the interest rate on inclusive MSB and toll-road loans by one percentage point and 0.5 percentage points in Q4 2022, respectively. Financial institutions were encouraged to surrender profits to enterprises through direct reductions or the return of collected interest. As for the actual amount of interest reduced by financial institutions, the PBOC provided funding incentives for them to reduce it by the full amount. Once completed, the two policies will be smoothly withdrawn.Launching the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects to support financial institutions in issuing loans to overdue housing projects so as to ensure their delivery. In line with the decisions of the State Council executive meetings, the PBOC launched the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects with a quota of RMB200 billion, following the principles of targeted liquidity, positive incentives, and market-oriented approaches. In December 2022, the PBOC released the Notice on Launching the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects, which clarifies that special central lending adopts a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a quarterly basis. The scheme supports loans issued by financial institutions from November 1, 2022, to March 31, 2023. After independently making the decision to grant loans at their own risk, financial institutions can apply to the PBOC for funding support. For qualified loans, the PBOC provides funding support equal to 100 percent of the principal. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in structural guidance Constantly improving the level of financial services for MSBs. The PBOC encouraged financial institutions to follow market-oriented principles to allow deferrals of the principal and the interest repayments on loans to eligible MSBs due in Q4 2022, effectively alleviating pressure for principal and interest repayments by market entities. The PBOC promoted implementation of the Notice on Promoting the Establishment of the Long-term Mechanism for Boosting the Financial Sector’s Confidence, Willingness, Capability, and Expertise in Lending to Micro and Small Businesses and it guided financial institutions to stipulate detailed rules for implementation and to enhance their allocations of internal resources and policy arrangements. As of end-2022, inclusive MSB loans and the number of MSBs granted loans registered a year-on-year increase of 23.8 percent and 26.8 percent, respectively. Increasing financial support for rural revitalization. The PBOC continued to put in place the Opinions on Ensuring Financial Support for Advancing Rural Revitalization on All Fronts in 2022 and worked with a number of ministries to release the Work Plan for Expanding Current Investment in the Construction of Agricultural and Rural Infrastructure, enhancing financial support for the construction of agricultural and rural infrastructure and expanding effective investments. The PBOC made efforts to provide financial services for ensuring a stable and secure supply of grain and key agricultural products, increased the supply of financial resources for the production and circulation of agricultural products and the new industrial and business forms, and promoted the integrated development of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in the rural areas. As of end-2022, outstanding agro-related loans registered a year-on-year increase of 14.0 percent, reaching RMB49.3 trillion.Strengthening coordination and cooperation between the industrial policy and the financial policy so as to enhance the efficiency of financing matchmaking based on the departmental coordination mechanism. The PBOC kept track of the new loans for the manufacturing sector and sci-tech innovation, strengthened supervision and guidance and promoted the channeling of more resources to the relevant areas. As of end-December, medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector witnessed year-on-year growth of 36.7 percent, maintaining growth of about 30 percent for 26 consecutive months. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform have been continuously unleashed, thus further bringing down the actual loan rates. Since 2022, under guidance, the one-year and over-five-year LPR have dropped 0.15 and 0.35 percentage points, respectively. In April, the PBOC established the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates, urged banks to take for reference the bond rates represented by the yield on 10-year government securities and the loan rates represented by the one-year LPR so as to reasonably adjust the deposit interest rates. In September, major banks voluntarily lowered their posted deposit rates and the authorized ceiling on their internal pricing, and other banks followed suit. This marks a crucial step forward in the market-oriented reform of deposit rates. Lowering the interest rate floor on first-home loans. The PBOC reduced the interest rate floor on first-home loans from the LPR of the corresponding duration to LPR minus twenty basis points at the national level and the interest rate policy for second-home loans remained unchanged. The interest rate on personal housing provident fund loans was cut by 0.15 percentage points, better meeting the basic funding demands of residents. Based on a temporary cut in the interest rate floor on first-home loans in some cities in September, the PBOC and the CBIRC established a dynamic mechanism for mortgage rates of first-time home buyers on December 30. It allowed the municipal governments to scientifically evaluate the price changes of local commercial housing sales on a quarterly basis, thereby dynamically adjusting their first-home loan policy. If the prices of newly built commercial housing sales witness a month-on-month and a year-on-year decline for three consecutive months, they can temporarily maintain, lower, or remove the interest rate floor for first-home loans. VIII. Improving the regime for the market-oriented formation of the RMB exchange rate The PBOC continued to advance the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange-rate regime based on marketsupply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It ensured that the market played a decisive role in determining the exchange rate. The PBOC focused on guiding expectations and enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate while keeping it basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. As a result, the exchange rate played the role of an auto stabilizer in macroeconomic management and for the balance of payments. In 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the U.S. dollar were 6.3014 and 7.2555, respectively. During the 242 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 114 days and depreciated on 128 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 1.4 percent (1008 bps) and 1.0 percent (681 bps), respectively. The RMB depreciated against the dollar and the euro, while it appreciated against other major currencies. As of end-2022, the central parity of the RMB against the U.S. dollar and the euro depreciated 8.5 percent and 2.7 percent, respectively, from end-2021, while the central parity of the RMB against the pound and the Japanese yen appreciated 2.5 percent and 5.8 percent, respectively, during the same period. From 2005, when the reform of the RMB exchange-rate formation regime began to end-2022, the RMB appreciated 18.8 percent, 34.9 percent, and 39.5 percent, respectively, against the U.S. dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen cumulatively. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which reduced the exchange costs for microeconomic entities and promoted bilateral trade and investment. As of end-2022, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBOC and the overseas monetary authorities, the overseas monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB88.777 billion and the PBOC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD551 million. These operations promoted bilateral trade and investment.IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions More achievements were made in forestalling and defusing financial risks. The PBOC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with some prominent financial risks properly resolved. Addressing the risks of key groups and large enterprises was steadily advanced, and progress was made in resolving the risks of small and medium banks in high-risk regions. Central bank ratings on financial institutions were conducted on a quarterly basis, according to which banking financial institutions in China were basically sound with controllable risks. The PBOC conducted differentiated management of financial institutions according to the rating results to make risk forestalling and defusing more targeted. It also strengthened the monitoring and early warnings on bank risks, made timely corrections in response to the emerging problems, and guided any anomaly indexes in most of the banks to return to normal, thus promoting early identification and resolution of risks. In addition, the PBOC designated some pilot areas in which it strengthened the hard constraints of early and timely rectifications of new high-risk institutions. The PBOC conducted annual stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions, including 19 Domestic Systemically Important Banks, and it developed a stress-testing system that was more scientific, systematic, and automatic. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBOC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scopes, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. It guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main businesses, and play an effective role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control. Box 3 Reinforcing Systems that Safeguard Financial Stability and Ensuring that No Systemic Risks Arise During the past five years, the PBOC has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. In line with the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it has coordinated with relevant government agencies to fight the toughbattle of preventing and defusing major financial risks, continuously reinforced the systems that safeguard financial stability, effectively responded to the test of serious and complicated situations in and out of China and COVID-19 shocks, and maintained financial security, stability, and development, therefore fostering a safe and stable environment for the sustained and healthy development of the financial sector. First, resolving major financial risks in a targeted and effective manner In line with the arrangements and requirements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBOC has coordinated with relevant government agencies to fight the tough battle of preventing and defusing major financial risks, effectively resolving major financial risks in a targeted and effective manner and thoroughly overhauling shadow banking and cracking down on illegal financial activities. After three years of focused and arduous efforts, the rising momentum of systemic financial risks has been contained, and the trend that funds are diverted out of the real economy and there is blind expansion in the financial sector has been fundamentally reversed, holding firmly to the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. First, effectively resolving the risks of key high-risk groups. The PBOC has “defused bombs with precision” among high-risk groups with large assets and liabilities, including conglomerates such as Mingtian, Anbang, Huaxin, and the HNA Group. Decisive actions have been initiated to take over ten financial institutions under the Mingtian conglomerate, such as Baoshang Bank. Anbang Group has been split and restructured with Dajia, a newly established insurer. An integrated bankruptcy has been completed in the Huaxin Group to ensure that all creditors are repaid fairly based on the law. The bankruptcy and restructuring of the HNA group have been completed, with the rights and interests of old shareholders cleared to guarantee the rights and interests of creditors, to ensure safe operation of its main business line (aviation), and to safeguard social stability. Second, promoting reforms and risk mitigation of small and medium-sized financial institutions in an orderly manner. The PBOC has successfully resolved risks in key financial institutions such as Hengfeng Bank. Financial restructuring as well as capital increases and share expansion plans have been smoothly implemented in Harbin Bank and Bank of Gansu. From 2020 to 2022, an additional RMB550 billion of special-purpose bonds for local governments have been issued to replenish capital for small and medium-sized banks. The PBOC supported and coordinated with relevant local governments to promote reforms and risk mitigation of small and medium-sized financial institutions, thereby decreasing the number of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions.Third, thoroughly overhauling shadow banking and cracking down on illegal financial activities. The PBOC launched new rules on asset management and supporting implementation rules to introduce unified regulatory standards with a focus on breaking up the high-risk shadow banking business and cross-market financial products. “Quasi-credit” high-risk shadow banking dropped by nearly RMB30 trillion from its historical peak. The campaign to rectify risks in Internet financing has been smoothly completed, and nearly 5000 P2P lending firms have been closed. The harsh crackdown on illegal fund raising has been enforced, and a cumulative 25,000 cases have been filed and investigated during the past five years. Second, improving the building of an institutional system that safeguards financial stability During the past five years, the PBOC has forcefully advanced the building of an institutional system to prevent and defuse financial risks, continuously strengthened financial legislation, further improved the institutional framework for macro-prudential management, and continually enhanced the system for financial risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning. Therefore, the prevention and defusing of financial risks has become increasingly law-based and institutionalized, and an institutional foundation for sound financial operations has been further consolidated. First, legislation on financial stability has achieved remarkable progress. In cooperation with other government agencies, the PBOC has continued to advance legislation on financial stability and major progress has been made. In December 2022, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress for the first time reviewed the draft law on financial stability. The overall principles of the draft law are as follows: upholding the Party’s centralized and unified leadership over financial work and coordinating development and security; adopting a problem-oriented approach and applying systems thinking, making active efforts to improve the institutional arrangements for the entire process of handling financial risks, i.e., fending off risks in advance, defusing risks when they arise, and ex post resolution; adhering to market-oriented and law-based principles, and ensuring that relevant parties fulfill their respective responsibilities for addressing financial risks so that systemic risks and moral hazards are both guarded against; ensuring that responsibilities are matched with power and that the division of obligations is law-based, reasonable in light of the Chinese context, and improving the working mechanism for coordination and cooperation. Second, putting in place and improving the deposit insurance system. As of end-September 2022, there were 4,015 insured institutions nationwide. The limit of deposit insurance coverage in the amount of RMB500,000 provides full-amount insurance for 99.3 percent of depositors. Through enhanced publicity of depositinsurance, public awareness and its credibility have been built up significantly. In November 2020, the logo of deposit insurance was launched comprehensively, and regular and institutionalized promotion of deposit insurance emerged. The PBOC improved the risk-differentiated premium mechanism and early corrections have delivered initial results. By requiring insured institutions to adopt measures to defuse risks, such as the timely replenishing of capital, reining in asset growth, stemming the granting of credit for major transactions, and lowering the leverage ratio, the PBOC has pushed for hundreds of institutions to be removed from the list of problem insured institutions. The PBOC also worked to explore the role of deposit insurance as the resolution platform in a market-oriented and law-based manner to address risks in key regions and institutions. Third, establishing a fund for ensuring financial stability (the Fund). The Fund, controlled by the central authority, is positioned to provide funds to address China’s major financial risks. It is funded by financial institutions, financial infrastructure operators, and other entities. The Fund, along with the Deposit Insurance Fund and the relevant industry protection funds, comprise a “two-tier” system, and their cooperation and coordination jointly safeguard financial stability and security. In resolving major financial risks, financial institutions, shareholders and actual controllers, the Deposit Insurance Fund, and relevant industry protection funds should invest corresponding resources in accordance with the laws and their responsibilities. When financial risks seriously endanger financial stability, the Fund can ben used in line with the requirements. The basic framework of the Fund has been established with some accumulation of funds, and its funds have already been utilized in two risk resolution cases. Fourth, continuing to improve the system for financial risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning. The PBOC has comprehensively assessed the soundness of China’s financial system and since 2017 it has conducted quarterly central banking ratings of banking financial institutions, thus guiding financial institutions to operate in a prudent and sound manner. Since the end of 2020, the PBOC has conducted risk monitoring and early warning for banking financial institutions (level 1–level 7) on a quarterly basis, timely identifying any possible latent risks and taking measures to help most abnormal banking indicators return to normal levels. Stress tests have been conducted on about 4,000 banking institutions for eleven consecutive years. Fifth, strengthening integrated supervision over systemically important financial institutions. The PBOC has approved licenses to establish three financial holding companies, and market access management and continuous supervision have been carried out in a prudent and orderly manner. The PBOC unveiled supervisory regulations for systemically important financial institutions and it has improved thesupervisory framework. It strengthened integrated supervision and development planning for the financial infrastructure and it has facilitated creation of a well-organized, effective, advanced, reliable, and resilient financial infrastructure system. Release of the Administrative Measures for the Administration of the Total Loss-absorbing Capacity of Global Systemically Important Banks is aimed at enhancing the capability of global systemically important banks to serve the real economy and to fend off risks. Third, working approaches for the next step For the next step, the PBOC will fully implement the guiding principles of the 20 th CPC National Congress and the Central Economic Work Conference, prioritize stability while pursuing progress, effectively prevent and defuse major economic and financial risks, and strengthen systems that safeguard financial stability. It will continuously defuse risks in key corporations, groups, and financial institutions, further deepen reforms in financial institutions, steadily advance financial legislation, and continue to strengthen prudential supervision and behavioral supervision in the financial sector. The PBOC will commit itself to both addressing existing risks and guarding against potential risks, will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability to make up for shortcomings in financial risk prevention and resolution, and will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur . X. Improving the capability to serve foreign exchange arrangements Supporting development of cross-border financing. In January 2022, the People's Bank of China (PBOC) and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) issued the Notice on Overseas Lending by Banking Institutions, strengthening joint management of banks’ overseas lending, cross-border guarantees, outbound direct investments, and other businesses. In May, the SAFE issued the Notice on Supporting High-tech and “Specialized, Sophisticated, Distinctive, and Innovative” Enterprises in Carrying out Pilot Programs for Cross-border Financing Facilitation, deciding to further expand the pilot coverage to facilitate more high-tech and “specialized, sophisticated, distinctive, and innovative” enterprises to borrow foreign debt independently within a certain quota so as to accelerate their innovative development. Promoting the coverage and quality of facilitation policies for quality enterprises. In Shanghai, Guangdong, Shaanxi, Beijing, Shenzhen, Zhejiang, Qingdao, and Ningbo, a second batch of pilot projects of integrated local and foreign-currency capital pools for multinational corporations was carried out for 40 enterprises in order to facilitate the integrated use of cross-border funds by multinational corporations.Policy publicity and training was continuously carried out, with best business practices shared in the banking industry. More prudent and compliant banks were supported in taking facilitation measures to handle the foreign exchange trade receipt and payment business for enterprises with sound credit records, with the aim of continuously improving the convenience for market entities. The facilitation policies have covered all regions of China, and by the end of 2022, a total of USD1.2 trillion facilitation businesses had been processed. Part 3 Financial Market Conditions In 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates featured a downward movement, with increased transaction volumes. The interest rates of bond issuances were generally steady, with issuance volumes of government securities picking up. The bond market witnessed active transactions. The stock market index fluctuated downward, with turnover and the amount of funds raised decreasing year on year. In the insurance industry, premium revenue rose year on year and asset growth accelerated. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates witnessed a continuous decline, with increased market transactions In December 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 1.26 percent, 15 basis points lower than that in September 2022 and the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos posted 1.41 percent, 5 basis points lower than that in September 2022. The monthly weighted average interest rate for government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.11 percent, 30 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos. At end-2022, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 1.96 percent and 2.22 percent, respectively, down 17 basis points and 5 basis points from end-December 2021, respectively. Transaction volumes increased. In 2022, the volume of bond repos trading on the interbank market reached RMB1380 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB5.5 trillion, up 32 percent year on year. The cumulative volume of trading for interbank lending registered RMB146.8 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB587.3 billion and a year-on-year increase of 23.6 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 86.4 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2 percentage points year on year, and overnight lending constituted 89.2 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, the samepercentage as that in the previous year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 15.2 percent year on year to RMB403.5 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposits (CDs) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In 2022, about 26,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB20.5 trillion. The total volume of trading on the secondary market registered RMB232.0 trillion. At end-2022, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.2 trillion. In 2022, about 53,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB12.7 trillion, an increase of RMB1.3 trillion year on year. In 2022, the weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.22 percent, 15 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor.Interest rate swap transactions remained stable. In 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 244,000 transactions, decreasing 3.2 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB21.0 trillion, a decrease of 0.4 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly, and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB14.2 trillion, accounting for 67.7 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate (FR) and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 89.3 percent and 9.7 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 834 transactions, with RMB124.04 billion of the notional principal.The interest rate options business developed at a steady pace. In 2022, a total of 525 interest rate options transactions were concluded, totaling RMB71.8 billion. Specifically, 6 were interest rate swap transactions, amounting to RMB1.7 billion of the notional principal, and 519 were interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB70.1 billion of the notional principal. 2. The coupon rates of bonds remained generally stable, while bond issuances remained unchanged with active trading of spot bonds The coupon rates of bonds remained generally stable. In December 2022, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.83 percent, 1 basis point higher than that in December 2021. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 3.00 percent, 2 basis points lower than the rate in December 2021. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.85 percent, 81 basis points higher than the rate in December 2021.The yield on government securities was generally stable with expanded term spreads. At end-December 2022, yields on 1-year and 3-year government securities decreased by 15 basis points and 5 basis points, to 2.10 percent and 2.40 percent from end-December 2021, respectively; yields on 5-year, 7-year, and 10-year government securities increased by 4 basis points, 4 basis points, and 6 basis points, to 2.64 percent, 2.82 percent, and 2.84 percent, from end-December 2021, respectively. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 74 basis points, expanding 21 basis points from end-December 2021. Bond issuances remained unchanged year on year. In 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances was RMB61.4 trillion, basically the same as that in the previous year. Specifically, the issuance of government securities increased more year on year, while the issuance of financial bonds and corporate credit bonds decreased year on year. At end-2022, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB144.8 trillion, representing an increase of 8.5 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed a marked increase. In 2022, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB309.1 trillion, registering an increase of 27.2 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank market was RMB271.2 trillion, representing an increase of 26.5 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB37.9 trillion, an increase of 32 percent year on year.3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market were generally stable The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB27.4 trillion, rising 13.4 percent year on year. At end-2022, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB17.4 trillion, increasing by 16.0 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances saw steady growth. At end-2022, outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew by RMB2.3997 trillion and RMB343.4 billion compared to the beginning of 2022 and end-Q3 2022, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 68.3 percent was issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with interest rates generally stable. In 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB53.9 trillion, growing 17.5 percent year on year. At end-2022, the balance of bill financing was RMB12.8 trillion, up 30.0 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 6 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 0.9 percentage points year on year. In 2022, the interest rates for bill financing first increased and then decreased, but they remained generally stable.4. The stock indices experienced a choppy fall with turnover and the amount of funds raised on the stock markets decreasing year on year The stock indices dropped. At end-2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,089 points, decreasing 15.1 percent from end-2021. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 11,016 points, decreasing by 25.9 percent from end-2021. The turnover on the stock markets declined year on year. In 2022, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB224.5 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB927.7 billion, representing a decrease of 12.6 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets witnessed a decrease year on year. In 2022, cumulative funds raised for the entire year were RMB1.3 trillion, a year-on-year decrease of 10.6 percent. 5. Premium income increased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In 2022, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB4.7 trillion, up 4.6 percent year on year, an acceleration of 5.4 percentage points compared to that recorded in 2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB1.5 trillion, representing a year-on-year decrease of 0.8 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 0.9 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went down by 2.4 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-2022, total assets in the insurance sector increased 9.1 percent year on year to RMB27.1 trillion, an acceleration of 2.3 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 8.3 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 7.8 percent year on year. 6. The turnover of spot foreign exchange transactions declined year on year In 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD8.3 trillion, a decrease of 16.6 percent year on year. The cumulativeturnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD19.3 trillion, a decrease of 4.9 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD12.6 trillion, accounting for 65.1 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD129.9 billion, rising 19.3 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD1.5 trillion, decreasing by 3.3 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 53.9 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, while international gold prices went up At end-2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,814 per ounce, representing an increase of 1.1 percent from end-2021. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB410.5 per gram, increasing by 9.8 percent from end-2021. In 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 39,000 tons, representing growth of 11.3 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB15.2 trillion, representing growth of 16 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market Institutional arrangements for bond lending were improved. In February 2022, the PBOC released the Measures for the Administration of Bond Lending in the Interbank Bond Market (Announcement No.1 [2022] of the PBOC). The Measures improve the institutional arrangements for bond lending in the interbank bond market by unifying the content of bond lending agreements, launching central bond lending, and improving the mechanism for default resolution. Requirements for risk prevention are also clarified in the Measures, involving aspects such as the reporting of high-value lending, information disclosures, risk monitoring, and self-regulation, aiming to protect the legitimate rights and interests of market participants, increase bond market liquidity, and enable the better functioning and sound development of the financial market. The variety of financial bonds issued by commercial banks was expanded. In April 2022, the PBOC and CBIRC jointly released the Notice on the Issuance of Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Eligible Non-Capital Bonds by Global Systemically Important Banks, specifying core elements and management regulations for the issuance of total loss-absorbing capacity eligible non-capital bonds. The Notice provides the basis for the orderly issuance of the said bonds by global systemically important banks.The bond market was further opened up in a high-quality manner. In May 2022, the PBOC, CSRC, and SAFE jointly released the Matters Concerning Further Facilitating Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Announcement No.4 [2022] of the PBOC, CSRC, and SAFE). Based on the principle of “one set of rules, one bond market,” the Announcement further facilitates overseas institutional investments in China’s bond market by unifying relevant policy requirements and cross-border fund management. 2. Institutional arrangements and reforms in the securities market The rule of law was strengthened in the capital market. In January 2022, the Supreme People’s Court released the Several Provisions on the Trial of Civil Cases for Damages for the Tort of Misrepresentation in the Securities Market, which raise the costs for unlawful acts in the capital market, urge all market participants to perform their respective duties, and ensure investors’ right to remedy. On April 20, the 34th session of the 13th NPC Standing Committee voted through the Futures and Derivative Law of the People's Republic of China. Aiming to serve the real economy, forestall and control financial risks, and deepen financial reform, the Law is characterized by market principles, the rule of law, and internationalization. It stipulates basic rules for futures and derivative markets in a comprehensive and systematic manner, thus filling the gaps in the legal framework of the capital market and providing legal guarantees for building a more regulated, transparent, open, vigorous, and resilient capital market. Reform of the registration-based IPO system was advanced in a stable manner. In April 2022, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on Improving Post-Delisting Supervision of Listed Companies, improving the delisting mechanism of listed companies and helping to create a sound environment for smooth market entry and exit. In May, the CSRC released the Provisions on Piloting the Business of Trading Stocks on the Sci-Tech Innovation Board by Securities Companies as Market Makers, which helped to introduce the market maker mechanism to the sci-tech innovation board in a bid to improve stock liquidity and market resilience. In May, the CSRC, MOJ, and MOF jointly released the Opinions on Strengthening Supervision of the Cleanness of Intermediaries under the Registration-based IPO System, for the purposes of regulating the cleanness of intermediaries and their staff members, facilitating the cracking down on financial corruption along with the forestalling and controlling of financial risks, and safeguarding the reform of the registration-based IPO system. Cooperation on audit regulation was deepened between China and the US. On August 26, 2022, the CSRC, MOF, and the US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) signed an audit oversight cooperation agreement. The agreement laid a foundation for equal and efficient cooperation in the next stage under the premise ofcomplying with both parties’ respective laws and regulations. On December 15, the PCAOB issued a report confirming that the PCAOB was able to inspect and completely investigate accounting firms headquartered in Chinese mainland and Hong Kong in 2022 and vacating its December 2021 determinations regarding relevant firms. The bilateral cooperation yielded positive results. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market Related-party transactions of insurance institutions were regulated. In January 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Related-Party Transactions of Banking and Insurance Institutions, introducing requirements on the number and scale of related-party transactions and focusing particularly on the risks of tunneling that directs profits to shareholders and their related parties. Following the principle of substance over form and penetrating regulation, the Rules improve recognition of related parties and their transactions, require institutions to shoulder primary responsibility for managing related-party transactions, and specify the punishment of institutions and their directors, supervisors, and senior executives for violations. In May, the CBIRC released the Notice on Strengthening Supervision of Related-Party Transactions in Insurance Institutions’ Fund Investment. The mechanism for capital replenishment of insurance companies was improved. In August, the PBOC and CBIRC jointly released the Notice on Issues Concerning the Issuance of Undated Capital Bonds by Insurance Companies, allowing insurance companies to replenish core Tier 2 capital by issuing undated capital bonds. The PBOC regulates the overall balance of capital replenishment bonds, including undated capital bonds issued by an insurance company. Institutional arrangements of the China Insurance Security Fund (CISF) were improved. In October 2022, the CBIRC, MOF, and PBOC revised and released the Rules on the Insurance Security Fund. The revision covers improvements in aspects such as fund-raising, financial requirements, fund use management, bailout provisions, and fund supervision so as to give better play to the role of the CISF in forestalling and defusing financial risks. The insurance industry was encouraged to participate in the development of the third pillar of the elderly care. In November 2022, the CBIRC released the Notice on Matters Related to Personal Pension Business of Insurance Companies, specifying basic requirements for insurance companies to carry out a personal pension business and allowing insurance companies to provide individuals who have personal pension accounts with qualified annuity insurance, endowment insurance, and other products approved by the CBIRC. The Notice also clarifies the management of capital, contracts, and sales, as well as customer services and the regulatory requirements of the personal pension business.Information disclosure of life insurance products was standardized. In November 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Information Disclosures of Life Insurance Products, specifying the content and objects of information disclosure by insurance companies, requiring insurance companies to improve their internal product information disclosure management mechanism, and clarifying the responsibilities of relevant management personnel as well as the regulatory measures and punishments that may be taken for violations of the Rules. The Rules shall take effect as of June 30, 2023. 4. Institutional arrangements of the financial infrastructure Swap Connect between Mainland and Hong Kong made its debut. On July 4, 2022, the PBOC, the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (HKSFC), and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) jointly announced the launch of development of mutual access between the Hong Kong and Mainland interest-rate swap markets (Swap Connect). Swap Connect will facilitate participation in the mainland RMB currency swap market by overseas investors and will support the financial opening-up at a high level. Bond Connect has operated smoothly and efficiently during the past five years. On July 4, 2022, the PBOC, HKSFC, and HKMA jointly hosted the fifth anniversary forum of Bond Connect and the ceremony launching Swap Connect via video link. Since its inception five years ago in 2017, Bond Connect has been serving as a two-way bridge and operating smoothly and efficiently, marking a major milestone in deepening the opening-up of China’s financial markets. Overall supervision and development planning of the financial infrastructure were strengthened. In December 2022, the PBOC solicited public opinions on the Measures for the Supervision of the Financial Infrastructure (Exposure Draft). The Measures aims to clarify the overall framework for the supervision of the financial infrastructure and to improve access management of the financial infrastructure so as to foster a new development paradigm featuring “dual circulation” and to serve the real economy with better financial services. Part 4 Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments Global inflation has eased recently, but remains at a historic high. The global economic recovery is slowing and global financial markets are seeing large swings as central banks in the major advanced economies continue their policy tightening. Thecumulative effect of this round of rate hikes is yet to be fully felt, and its implications for global economic growth, capital flows, and financial markets merit attention. 1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies Economic growth slowed down notably. In the US, GDP grew in Q4 by 2.9 percent at an annualized pace, posting a positive quarter-on-quarter growth for two straight quarters and pointing to higher probability of a soft landing. The fast rate hike by the Federal Reserve (Fed) has taken effect, as the growth rate was lower than the 3.2 percent in Q3. The US manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) was 48.4 in December, contracting for two straight months, while the non-manufacturing PMI plunged to 49.6 from 56.5 in November, the biggest month-on-month decline since the outbreak of COVID-19. In December, housing sales dropped 1.5 percent from a month earlier, a negative month-on-month growth for eleven consecutive months. In the euro area, GDP grew by 0.1 percent in Q4 quarter on quarter, a further slowdown from the 0.3 percent in Q3. In December, the PMI for manufacturing and services was 47.8 and 49.8, contracting for six and five straight months, respectively. In Japan, GDP in Q4 was back to the positive territory, growing 0.6 percent on an annualized basis. However, falling enterprise capital expenditure and inventory still weighs on economic recovery. Inflation came down in the US and Europe, but remained at a historic high. In December 2022, the US CPI was up by 6.5 percent year on year, falling for six months in a row, and the PCE rose 5.0 percent compared with the prior year. These two measures of inflation both remained elevated. The HICP in the euro area rose by 9.2 percent over the prior year, falling for two straight months. The CPI in the UK jumped by 10.5 percent compared with the previous year, 0.6 percentage points lower than the high of 11.1 percent in October. The CPI in Japan was up 4 percent year on year, the biggest jump since 1991. The recovery of labor supply was slow. Labor shortage remains a main problem in the major advanced economies. In the US, job vacancies stood at 11.012 million in December compared with 10.44 million in November, exceeding 10 million for eighteen consecutive months. The unemployment rate fell further to 3.5 percent in December, a historic low. Growth of US non-farm payrolls slowed to 223,000 in December from 263,000 in November. Going forward, performance of the labor market will depend on the relative changes in labor supply and demand. Global financial markets witnessed large swings. Stock markets in the US and Europe rallied, as market fears over higher rates for longer eased amid signs of falling inflation. Performance of bond markets diverged. The 10-year US Treasury yield rose above 4.2 percent in October and fluctuated downwards thereafter. As the European Central Bank (ECB) sent out a strong tightening signal, the yields on Europeangovernment bonds went up at the end of the year. The yield on 10-year Japanese government bond rose as the Bank of Japan raised the cap of its yield curve control policy. The US Dollar Index once hit a 20-year high and then fell, the euro rebounded to around 1.07 dollar per euro after falling below parity against the US dollar, and the Japanese yen depreciated to levels below 150 yen per dollar and was back to slightly higher than 130 yen per dollar at year end. The euro, Japanese yen, and British pound all hit a 20-year low against the US dollar.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major advanced economies slowed the pace of monetary tightening, but policy stance remained unchanged. In 2022, the Fed kicked off afresh round of rate hikes since December 2018 and raised rates on seven occasions by a total of 425 basis points (bps), bringing the federal funds rate to a target range of 4.25-4.5 percent from 0-0.25 percent at the start of the year. By breakdown, it hiked rate by 25 bps in March, 50 bps in May, 75 bps each in June, July, September and November, and 50 bps in December. In December dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2023 was 5-5.25 percent. In March, the Fed ended asset purchases, and in June began to reduce the size of its balance sheet with monthly cap for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities being USD30 billion and USD17.5 billion, respectively, which was then increased in September to USD60 billion and USD35 billion, respectively. In 2022, the ECB increased the interest rate for the first time in nearly eleven years. It raised the rate on four occasions, each by 50 bps, 75 bps, 75 bps, and 50 bps respectively. After a total hike of 250 bps, the interest rate on its main refinancing operations, marginal lending facility, and deposit facility now stood at 2.5 percent, 2.75 percent, and 2.0 percent, respectively. The ECB put an end to net asset purchases under its Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP) at end-March, and stopped net asset purchases under the Asset Purchase Program (APP) in July. It will start shrinking its balance sheet in March 2023 by a monthly average amount of EUR15 billion before the end of Q2 of 2023. The pace of unwinding after Q2 is yet to be determined. In the meantime, the ECB created the Transmission Protection Instrument (TPI) to ensure smooth transmission of monetary policy across the euro area. TPI purchases would be focused on public sector securities of the highly indebted members of the euro area. The Bank of England (BOE) started to raise rate in December 2021, and increased the Bank Rate eight times in 2022 by a total of 325 bps to 3.5 percent. In particular, it raised the Bank Rate by 75 bps in November, the biggest single hike in 2022, and hiked again by 50 bps in December. The BOE announced the decision to reduce its balance sheet in February, and began to sell investment-grade enterprise bonds and gilts in September and November respectively. The Bank of Japan increased its cap on 10-year bond yields from 0.25 percent to 0.5 percent. It ended as scheduled additional purchases of commercial paper and corporate bonds at end-March, with the pace of asset purchase back to pre-COVID levels. Among the other central banks, the Reserve Bank of Australia hiked rate eight times, while the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Bank of Korea all raised rates seven times, by a total of 300 bps, 400 bps, 350 bps, and 225 bps, respectively. Some emerging economies raised interest rates several times. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the spillovers from monetary policy tightening in the advanced economies, the major emerging market economies hiked their interest rates on several occasions in 2022. The central banks in Mexico and South Africa increased their interest rates eight and six times in 2022 by a total of 500 bps and 325 bps respectively, while the central banks in Brazil, India, and Indonesia all increased their rates five times by a total of 450 bps, 225 bps, and 200 bps, respectively.3. Issues and trends that merit attention The extent and pace of decline in overseas inflation remains uncertain. During previous episodes of high inflation caused by two oil shocks in the 1970s, it took more than one year for the elevated inflation to come down. Bringing inflation down is a gradual and bumpy journey with potential setbacks. In January 2023, the US CPI rose 0.5 percent month on month, higher than market expectations. At present, energy and other commodity prices are still susceptible to disruptions from geopolitical tensions, and the global supply chain is still facing challenges from near-shoring, friend-shoring and other protectionist measures despite eased supply chain strains. Downward pressure on the global economy is rising. In its latest forecast, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected that the world economy would grow 2.9 percent in 2023, 0.5 percentage points lower than the growth in 2022. The World Bank, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and other international organizations also revised down their global economic growth forecasts for 2023. On top of geopolitical tensions, energy crunch, and high inflation, monetary tightening also weighs on the economy. As the tightening effect has a lag and the rapid rate hikes by the major advanced economies have cumulative effects, the drag on global growth may be stronger than expected. Some financial risks may be exposed faster. First, tighter liquidity has amplified financial market adjustments. Asset prices have seen large swings. Non-bank financial institutions such as pension funds, insurers, and hedge funds are facing a mounting pressure. Some financially weak market entities may face shocks. Second, as rate hikes by the Fed speeds up flight to safety, other countries, in particular the developing economies will witness growing capital outflow pressures. Third, a stronger dollar coupled with worsening economic outlook at home may put to test the debt servicing capacity of those emerging market economies with a higher share of dollar-denominated debts. The new climate protectionism merits attention. The US Inflation Reduction Act provides subsidies for electric vehicles, and requires, among others, a specified portion of battery components must be manufactured or assembled in North America. The European Union (EU) has decided to implement Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism, which will increase the cost of exporting to the EU. This could have a far-reaching impact on the green transition of the global economy. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In 2022, in the face of the complicated and serious situations at home and abroad andthe impact of multiple unexpected factors, all regions and departments coordinated COVID-19 containment and economic and social development in an effective way, and accelerated implementation of a package of policy measures, providing robust support for the stability of macro economy. Economic output reached a new level. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in 2022 grew by 3.0 percent year on year to RMB121.0207 trillion on a comparable basis. By quarters, GDP in Q1 grew by 4.8 percent year on year, while that in Q2, Q3, and Q4 grew by 0.4 percent, 3.9 percent, and 2.9 percent year on year, respectively. According to the annual average exchange rate, GDP in 2022 totaled USD18 trillion, ranking second in the world. 1. Consumption remained basically stable, investments grew steadily, and imports and exports expanded rapidly. The increase in residents’ income kept pace with economic growth, and consumption remained generally stable. In 2022, the country’s per capita disposable income reached RMB36883, increasing by 5.0 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 2.9 percent year on year in real terms. The structure of income distribution continuously improved. The nominal and real growth rates of rural residents’ income were 2.4 percentage points and 2.3 percentage points higher than those of urban residents, respectively. In 2022, total retail sales of consumer goods declined by 0.2 percent year on year. Consumption of basic living items saw stable growth and retail sales of grain, oil, food, and beverages by enterprises (units) above the designated size increased by 8.7 percent and 5.3 percent year on year, respectively. Investments grew steadily with an improved structure. In 2022, national fixed-asset investments (excluding those by rural households) increased by 5.1 percent year on year to RMB57.2138 trillion. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 9.1 percent, 4.0 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure increased by 9.4 percent, 4.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in real estate development decreased by 10.0 percent. Investments in the high-tech industry grew by 18.9 percent, 13.8 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Social investments grew by 10.9 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in health and education grew by 27.3 percent and 5.4 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports expanded rapidly. In 2022, imports and exports of goods grew by 7.7 percent year on year to RMB42.0678 trillion. Specifically, exports grew by 10.5 percent year on year and imports grew by 4.3 percent year on year, with the surplus of trade in goods posting RMB5.8630 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share of imports and exports under general trade increasing by 2.2 percentage points year on year and accounting for 63.7 percent of total imports and exports. Imports and exports of private enterprises increased by 12.9 percent, accounting for 50.9 percent of total imports and exports, an acceleration of 2.3 percentage points yearon year. Imports and exports of machinery and electronics increased by 2.5 percent year on year, accounting for 49.1 percent of total imports and exports. China's imports and exports with its trading partners continued to rise. Imports and exports to the ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations), China's largest trade partner, and the countries along the Belt and Road grew by 15 percent and 19.4 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the manufacturing and high-tech industries. In 2022, actually utilized FDI increased by 6.3 percent year on year to RMB1.2327 trillion (equivalent to USD189.1 billion, growing by 8 percent year on year). The structure of FDI continued to be optimized. Actually utilized FDI in the manufacturing industry increased by 46.1 percent year on year, accounting for 26.3 percent of the total investment, an acceleration of 7.8 percentage points year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 28.3 percent year on year, accounting for 36.1 of the total investment, an acceleration of 7.1 percentage points year on year. 2. Agricultural production remained stable, industrial production maintained growth, and the service industry continued to recover. In 2022, the value-added of the primary industry totaled RMB8.8345 trillion, up 4.1 percent year on year; the value-added of the secondary industry totaled RMB48.3164 trillion, up 3.8 percent year on year; and the value-added of the tertiary industry totaled RMB63.8698 trillion, up 2.3 percent year on year. Agricultural production saw a bumper harvest, and animal husbandry grew steadily. In 2022, the country’s total grain output totaled 686.55 million tons, up 0.5 percent year on year, and annual output has been over 650 million tons for eight successive years. Specifically, the output of summer grains, early season rice, and autumn grains increased by 1.0 percent, 0.4 percent, and 0.4 percent, respectively. In 2022, output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 3.8 percent year on year; in particular, output of pork grew by 4.6 percent. At end-2022, the number of hogs in stock and for slaughter increased by 0.7 percent and 4.3 percent year on year, respectively. Industrial production maintained growth, and the equipment manufacturing sector and the high-tech manufacturing sector saw rapid growth. In 2022, the value-added of industrial enterprises above a designated size (IEDS) increased by 3.6 percent year on year. Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 7.3 percent year on year. The value-added of the manufacturing sector increased by 3.0 percent year on year. The electricity, heat, gas and water production and supply sectors increased by 5.0 percent year on year. The industrial structure was continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector increased by 7.4 percent and 5.6 percent year on year, respectively, which was3.8 percentage points and 2.0 percentage points higher than the growth of the value-added of IEDS, respectively. In terms of products, the output of new energy cars, base station equipment of mobile communication and Industrial Control Computer and system grew by 97.5 percent, 16.3 percent, and 15.0 percent year on year, respectively. The service industry continued to recover, and the modern service industry showed sound growth momentum. In 2022, the value-added of the services industry grew by 2.3 percent year on year. Specifically, the value-added of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services and the financial sector grew by 9.1 percent and 5.6 percent year on year, respectively. In 2022, the index of service production (ISP) decreased by 0.1 percent year on year. In particular, the ISP decreased by 0.8 percent year on year in December, a deceleration of 1.1 percentage points from November. From January to November, the revenue of service enterprises above a designated size (SEDS) increased by 3.9 percent year on year. Specifically, the revenue of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services, scientific research and technology services, health and social work enterprises increased by 8.3 percent, 8.3 percent, and 8.1 percent year on year, respectively. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and producer prices receded from their previous high level. Consumer prices increased moderately. In 2022, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased by 2.0 percent year on year, up 1.1 percentage points from that in 2021. The year-on-year increase in the CPI rose from 0.9 percent at the beginning of the year to a yearly high of 2.8 percent in September, and gradually fell back below 2 percent in the fourth quarter. Food prices increased by 2.8 percent for the entire year, accelerating by 4.2 percentage points from 2021. Non-food prices increased by 1.8 percent for the entire year, accelerating by 0.4 percentage points from 2021. Specifically, energy prices increased by 11.2 percent, constituting 40 percent of the overall CPI increase. The core CPI (excluding food and energy) rose moderately by 0.9 percent year on year, basically on par with that in the previous year. The growth of producer prices continued to narrow. Due to the pullback by commodity prices, the relatively weak demand, and the high base effect of 2021, growth of the Producer Price Index (PPI) continued to slide in 2022. The PPI increased by 4.1 percent year on year, decelerating by 4.0 percentage points from that in 2021. Specifically, the PPI in October, November, and December decreased by 1.3 percent, 1.3 percent, and 0.7 percent, respectively, falling into negative territory. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by 6.1 percent year on year, decelerating by 4.9 percentage points from 2021. In 2022, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBOC increased by 3.5 percent year onyear, a deceleration of 1.2 percentage points from the first three quarters and a deceleration of 3.6 percentage points from 2021. Box 4 Household Consumption is Expected to Recover Steadily Further promoting consumption is not only an intrinsic requirement for fulfilling people’s aspirations for a better life but also an important component of the strategy to expand domestic demand. It is also one of the key areas of the economic work in 2023. In the new journey towards building a modern socialist country in all respects and achieving Chinese modernization, it is necessary to maintain positive growth of consumption and to enhance its fundamental role in economic development. From a historical perspective, when development in most economies enters a certain stage, consumption becomes an important endogenous driver for long-term economic growth, which is favorable for supporting sustainable development, promoting economic circulation, and improving household well-being. This is more pronounced in the advanced economies. For instance, the household consumption rate (the ratio of household consumption expenditure to GDP) in the US has steadily increased from around 60 percent to above 68 percent over the past five decades, and the contribution of household consumption to economic growth in the past two decades has averaged over 70 percent. Household consumption rates in the euro area, the UK, and Japan have also surpassed 50 percent. China is different from other countries in terms of stage of economic development, savings culture, and statistical methods for household consumption. There are also weak links in relevant areas, such as income, distribution, social insurance, and supply. As a result, the household consumption rate in China is relatively low. Since the 18th CPC National Congress, China has deepened economic structural transformation and adjustment and won a complete victory in the fight against poverty, leading to an improvement in the household consumption rate. However, there are both room and challenges for sustained improvement. Affected by COVID-19, the momentum of consumption in China has slowed down further during the past three years. The average year-on-year growth of total retail sales of consumer goods was 2.6 percent during the three-year pandemic period (2020–2022), 6.5 percentage points lower than that in the pre-pandemic three-year period (2017–2019). This was mainly due to the circulation bottlenecks in both supply and demand as well as the lack of consumption willingness, affected by continuous disturbances from COVID-19. First, from the supply side, the spread of COVID-19 limited multiple consumption scenarios, leading to “inconvenience to consume”, especially for those types of consumption that involve gathering or physical contact. Second, from the demand side, as the downward pressure on the economy increased, households faced challenges in employment, income, investment, and wealth management, resulting in “unwillingness to consume”. Third, from the perspective of confidence, as the complicated nature of COVID-19 further increased uncertainty of the economic outlook, the risk preference in the household sector decreased and household precautionary savings increased, leading to “reluctance to consume”. Looking ahead to 2023, the factors that have constrained recovery of consumption are expected to ease. First, with the optimization of the pandemicprevention and control measures, consumption scenarios will expand and demands for visiting family and friends, leisure and entertainment, tourism and catering that have been suppressed in recent years will recover. Second, as the economic recovery curve continues to rise, a mutually supportive and virtuous interaction is likely to be formed for supply and demand as well as employment and income. Therefore, households will gain more confidence in future income and consumption, and some of the previously accumulated precautionary savings will gradually be released to satisfy actual consumption demands. Third, the strategy of expanding domestic demand has been extensively implemented, with a series of consumption-promoting policies announced and implemented, and consumption coupons released in multiple rounds across the country. These policy measures will gradually take effect. From the high-frequency data since the beginning of 2023, volume and consumption data about passengers have both shown signs of recovery during the Spring Festival. International experience has shown that the major economies experienced a consumption recovery within one to four quarters after the peak of COVID-19, with some even surpassing pre-pandemic levels. However, it should also be noted that uncertainty about consumption recovery still exists. During the three-year pandemic period, household-income growth has slowed down, and to some extent, the household balance sheet has also suffered from shocks. Whether household savings can be converted into consumption remains to be seen, while the complexity of the future evolution of pandemic also requires attention. In addition, medium- to long-term factors that will influence household consumption, such as social insurance coverage for new urban residents and rural migrant workers, as well as unified national-level management for unemployment and social insurance, still need to be further improved. From a medium- to long-term perspective, the consumption engine will provide indispensable support for the goal of reaching per capita GDP level of the moderately developed economies in 2035. Therefore, we need to be determined in giving full play to the strategic role of consumption growth. Currently, it is necessary to further release the potential of consumption growth. With China’s urbanization entering advanced stage, marginal capital return decreasing, and the model of real estate development drastically changing, the sustainability of rapid expansion of investment is facing challenges. From the perspective of a more balanced and stable economic structure, consumption growth needs to play a more important role. There is still plenty of room for consumption to drive China’s economic growth in the future. Currently, China’s per capita GDP is close to the threshold of the high-income countries (USD13,200), but the household consumption rate is still significantly lower than that of the high-income countries. From a decomposition perspective, household consumption rate = (household consumption expenditure / household disposable income) x (household disposable income / GDP). To improve the rate of household consumption, it is important to increase both ratios. The former ratio can be improved by increasing the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of households, especially for the medium- and low-income groups. This requires great efforts to improve the consumption environment, to increase the supplyof high-quality consumer goods and services, and to guide the creation of new consumption demand. It is also necessary to maintain steady and relatively rapid growth in household income, to improve the social security system, and to continuously enhance household confidence and sense of security so as to further unleash the potential of consumption. The latter ratio mainly relies on the improvement of income-distribution patterns. There is room to further improve the ratio of household income to national income, the proportion of medium- to low-income groups and the proportion of primary distribution that goes to wages and salaries. Overall, in the medium- to long-term, it is necessary and feasible to maintain stable consumption growth, which will help to better achieve endogenously-driven economic growth. 4. Fiscal revenue rose steadily, and expenditures grew rapidly. In 2022, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB20370.3 billion, increasing by 9.1 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded), or an increase of 0.6 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 13.1 percent and 5.9 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded), respectively, increasing by 3.8 percent and decreasing by 2.1 percent (calculated on a natural basis), respectively. Tax revenue amounted to RMB16661.4 billion, increasing by 6.6 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded), and decreasing by 3.5 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, the domestic value-added tax increased by 4.5 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded) and decreased by 23.3 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). The consumption tax and the corporate income tax increased by 20.3 percent and 3.9 percent, respectively. The personal income tax grew by 6.6 percent year on year. Non-tax income posted RMB3708.9 billion, increasing by 24.4 percent year on year. In 2022, expenditures in the national general public budget posted RMB26060.9 billion, increasing by 6.1 percent year on year, 5.8 percentage points higher than that in 2021. Specifically, expenditures in the central government’s general public budget and local general public budget increased by 3.9 percent and 6.4 percent year on year, respectively. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures related to health and social security and employment grew quickly, increasing by 17.8 percent and 8.1 percent year on year, respectively. 5. The employment situation remained generally stable. The surveyed urban unemployment rate declined. In 2022, 12.06 million people were newly employed, exceeding the original annual target of 11 million people. The national surveyed urban unemployment rate rose in some months due to factors such as COVID-19, with an annual average of 5.6 percent. The job market for major groups improved. The number of rural migrants in 2022 registered 295.62 million, up3.11 million from last year. The surveyed unemployment rate for youth continued to decline since Q3, posting 16.7 percent in December and decreasing by 3.2 percentage points below its peak in July. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt According to preliminary statistics, in 2022 China’s current account surplus registered USD417.5 billion, accounting for 2.3 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and remaining within a reasonable range. Specifically, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD685.6 billion, increasing by 22 percent year on year. Trade in services recorded a deficit of USD94.3 billion, decreasing by 6 percent year on year. Cross-border two-way investments remained generally stable and orderly. Direct investments witnessed a net inflow of USD32.3 billion, keeping the surplus of recent years. Specifically, outward direct investments registered USD158 billion. Enterprises went global in a stable and orderly manner. Foreign direct investments registered USD190.3 billion. China remained appealing to international long-term capital. As of the end of September 2022, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2481.5 billion. Specifically, the short-term external debt balance posted USD1355.6 billion, accounting for 55 percent of the total external debt balance. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In December 2022, among 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 2.3 percent and 3.8 percent year on year, respectively, down 4.3 percentage points and 4.8 percentage points, respectively, from last year. In 2022, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 24.3 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 26.7 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development fell by 10 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development fell by 9.5 percent year on year.At end-2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 1.5 percent year on year to RMB53.2 trillion. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 1.2 percent year on year to RMB38.8 trillion. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 2.1 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion. 7.2 Agriculture Strong agriculture is the basis of a strong socialist country, as it undergirds people’s livelihood, high-quality development, and national security. The top priority in building a strong agricultural country is to ensure a steady and safe supply of grain and other major agricultural products. In 2022, China’s grain production recorded an all-time high despite difficulties such as the sporadic outbreaks of COVID-19, the autumn floods in the north, the extreme droughts and heat waves in the south, and the high prices of materials for agricultural production. Total grain output registered 686.53 billion kilograms, up 0.5 percent or 3.68 billion kilograms year on year, remaining above 650 billion kilograms for the eighth years in succession. A bumper grain harvest underpinned the stability of the economy, expectations, and the overall situation. In spite of the hard-won achievements, the pressure cannot be overlooked. There are still multifaceted challenges in safeguarding food security. The first challenge is the resource and environmental constraints. Arable land per capita in China is less than 40 percent of the world’s average. This, coupled with the uneven distribution and generally low quality of arable land, puts a long-term limit on rational and effective use of arable land. The second challenge is the relative backwardness of agricultural technology and marketization. The variety selection and cultivation of most staple crops is conducted independently at home. However, some crops are still import-dependent due to the definite gap between China and countries with strong seed industries in terms of the quality and productivity of the crops. Problems concerning agricultural operations include small and scattered production, low level of market organization, as well as lack of a link between smallholders and modern agriculture. The third challenge is the highly import-dependent crops and overly concentrated source of imports. In 2021, more than 80 percent of the soybeans consumed in China were imported, 60 percent of which came from Brazil and 33 percent from the United States; and 9.2 percent of the corn consumed was imported, mostly from the United States and Ukraine, with a growing dependence on imports in recent years. Against the backdrop of intensified geopolitical conflicts, global agriculture and food supply experiences shocks and there will possibly be greater fluctuations in the prices of agricultural commodities, thus presenting challenges tosafeguarding national food security. The fourth challenge is the increase in extreme weather events. It has been pointed out in a report by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other institutions that compared with the 1980s and 1990s, extreme weather events, such as droughts and heat waves, occurred much more frequently after 2009, crippling global food supplies. In recent years, the same phenomenon occurred in China, posing serious challenges to food security. The Report to the 20th CPC National Congress makes it clear that “we must reinforce the foundations for food security on all fronts”, which puts forward a higher requirement on safeguarding food security. Following the Plan for Promoting Agricultural and Rural Modernization during the 14th Five-Year Plan Period, China will prioritize arable land and seed, step up policy and technology support, and take firm control of the food supply with the following methods. First, the area of arable land must be strictly guaranteed. China will ensure that the total area of farmland does not fall below the redline of 120 million hectares, and work to gradually develop all permanent basic cropland of about 104 million hectares into high-standard cropland. The agricultural layout will be balanced, with land and production guaranteed for major grain-producing areas, major grain-sales areas, and areas that coordinate grain production and sales. Mechanisms will be improved for subsidizing grain farmers and major grain-producing areas. Second, seed security must be strengthened. Seeds are crucial to food security. Therefore, it is important to establish a modern seed industry, to enhance the capability of protecting and utilizing seed resources, to strengthen the construction of seed banks, to improve the capacity for innovation in breeding, variety testing, and seed cultivation, and to facilitate the industrialization of biological breeding. Third, reform of agricultural modernization and marketization must be deepened. The reform of agricultural prices will go deeper to build an agricultural market characterized by an improved subsidy scheme, better financial services, enhanced policy insurance systems, and greater support for new types of agricultural businesses. Fourth, development driven by technology and reform must be accelerated. Led by core and key technologies and guided by urgent industrial needs, the development of agriculture will center on fundamental technologies, core seed sources, crucial agricultural equipment, and other areas. Research resources at all levels will be integrated and enterprises will play a more dominant role in scientific innovation so as to build a technological innovation system for agriculture featuring a clear structure, rational divisions, and moderate competition. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy The year 2022 is extremely important in the history of the CPC and the Chinesenation. The successful convening of the 20th CPC National Congress marks the beginning of a new journey toward building a modern socialist country in all respects and achieving the second centenary goal. Against the backdrop of the complex and rapidly changing international environment and the arduous task of promoting reform and development at home, under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, China has coordinated COVID-19 containment and social and economic development, strengthened macro policy adjustments, addressed the impact of factors exceeding expectations, and maintained overall economic and social stability. The achievements have not come easily. In 2022, China’s GDP grew by 3.0 percent year on year, with economic aggregates exceeding RMB120 trillion. The number of newly employed people reached 12.06 million, exceeding the target of 11 million. Prices remained stable against the backdrop of high global inflation, with the CPI recording year-on-year growth of 2.0 percent in 2022. The overall performance of the Chinese economy was stable in Q4. In Q4 2022, China’s GDP grew by 2.9 percent year on year, demonstrating the resilience of economic performance. The output of autumn grain was stable with a slight rise, and the “Chinese rice bowl” was held more firmly. Industrial production has overcome the impact of COVID-19 and maintained positive growth, with the output of green products, such as new-energy vehicles and solar cells, growing by over 50 percent. The income of residents grew steadily, and consumption momentum was constantly accumulated. Investment in infrastructure grew rapidly, and investment in technological transformation in the manufacturing sector increased with policy support, jointly playing an important role in stabilizing growth. The structure of foreign trade continued to improve, and the proportion of imports and exports of private enterprises increased by 2.3 percentage points, compared with the previous year. Looking ahead to 2023, the overall economy is expected to pick up and economic circulation will be smoother. First, China will stick to economic development as the central task and it will adhere to the “two unswerving rules” and opening wider to the outside world on all fronts, which will help boost the confidence of economic entities and stabilize market expectations. Second, optimization of COVID-19 containment has had a significantly positive impact on sustained economic recovery, and the order of production and life will be restored at an accelerated pace. Third, full implementation of the package of policies and follow-up measures to stabilize the economy introduced in 2022 will continue to unleash the effects of driving physical quantity and economic growth. We should also note that the current external environment remains severe and complex, and the foundation for a domestic economic recovery is not yet solidified. From an international perspective, geopolitical conflicts are still ongoing, the momentum for global economic growth is weakening, inflation in the developed economies remains elevated, and the interest rate hikes have not yet ended. All of thiswill had a deeper impact on the Chinese economy. From the domestic perspective, the disturbances brought about by the evolution of COVID-19 still require attention, the momentum of household savings shifting to consumption remains to be seen, the shift in the real estate industry to the new development model will take time, and local governments will continue to face pressures from balancing fiscal revenues and expenditures. In addition, the fading demographic dividends and the promotion of a green transition also pose medium- and long-term challenges. In this regard, we must face up to the difficulties while maintaining a strategic focus. The key is to focus on accomplishing our own tasks. Taken together, the Chinese economy is highly resilient, promising, and energetic. The fundamentals for China’s sound economic growth over the long run remain unchanged. We need to strengthen our confidence in economic work, comprehensively deepen the reform and opening-up, focus on expanding domestic demand, maintain stability of foreign trade and investment, and consolidate and expand the momentum for an economic recovery. On the whole, inflation is expected to remain moderate, but we should also be alert to a rebound in inflationary pressures in the future. In 2022, the CPI in China rose by 2.0 percent year on year, while PPI growth declined quarter by quarter and rose by 4.1 percent year on year. During the past five or ten years, China has kept the average annual growth of CPI at around 2 percent, achieving a hard-won price stability in the face of internal and external challenges. Looking ahead, inflationary pressures are generally under control for the short term. The Chinese economy is still in the process of recovery and development, and insufficient effective demand remains to be the principal contradiction. The industrial and supply chains are operating smoothly, and PPI growth is expected to remain at a low level on the whole. In the medium- and long-term, there are favorable conditions for keeping price levels generally stable. Supply and demand in the Chinese economy is generally balanced, monetary policies remain sound and prudent, and household inflation expectations are stable. In the meantime, we should also pay attention to the uncertainties in future domestic price trends. The consumption momentum may gradually increase after optimization of the COVID-19 containment. During the Spring Festival holiday in 2023, domestic tourism revenue increased by 30 percent year on year, and the number of passengers during the Spring Festival travel season rose by over 50 percent year on year. Economic vitality has been further unleashed, enterprises are accelerating resumption of work and full production, and recovery of the labor market is speeding up, which may affect future wage changes. The cumulative effects of various policies are gradually emerging. Inflation is stubborn in the major developed economies, and there is pressure from the upward trend in commodity prices. High inflation overseas is likely to be transmitted to China through links such as production and distribution. We should strengthen monitoring and analysis and keep an eye on a rebound in inflationary pressures. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, guided by Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will thoroughly study and implement the guidelines of the 20th CPC National Congress and the Central Economic Work Conference. Following the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully, and comprehensively, and play its part in accelerating the building of a new development paradigm and advancing Chinese modernization. It will adopt a strategic perspective, starting by improving social expectations and boosting confidence in achieving development. Pursuing a holistic approach, it will enhance coordination in the six aspects as required by the Central Economic Work Conference, making sure that implementation of the strategy to expand domestic demand is integrated with efforts to deepen the supply-side structural reform. Meanwhile, the PBOC will intensify macro adjustments, and develop a modern central banking system, and fully explore the efficacy of monetary and credit policies with a focus on stabilizing growth, employment, and prices. It will provide financial support for the real economy to effectively upgrade and appropriately expand economic output so that the journey toward a modern socialist country in all respects will get off to a good start. The PBOC will pursue a sound monetary policy in a targeted and forceful manner. While ensuring proper intertemporal adjustments, it will back efforts to expand domestic demand to further ramp up support for the real economy, and, at the same time, it will balance short-term and long-term goals, economic growth and price stability, as well as internal and external equilibria. The PBOC will resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies to consolidate sustainable support for the real economy. It will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, maintain effective growth of credit aggregates, and ensure that the growth rates of M2 and the AFRE continue to be basically in line with nominal economic growth, aiming for an overall effect of boosting consumption, expanding investment, and bolstering employment. Using the structural monetary policy tools in a targeted, appropriate, and flexible manner, the PBOC will guide financial institutions to enhance their financial services for such fields as inclusive finance, sci-tech innovation, and green development so as to foster a strong recovery of consumption and to reinforce the potential for economic growth. Additionally, policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments will be further brought into play to better stimulate effective investments. The PBOC will continue to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform. It will optimize the central bank policy rate system, give play to the important role of the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments, and tap into the LPR reform and the LPR’s guiding role. With these efforts, the costs for business financing and for consumer credit are expected to decline. Keeping a close watch oninflation development, it will provide support to ensure sufficient supplies and stable energy and grain prices to keep prices basically stable. Pursuing a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies and upholding the decisive role of the market in exchange rate formation, the PBOC will enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and improve expectation management so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Meanwhile, it will coordinate efforts to provide financial support for the real economy and to prevent risks, and it will take steady steps to defuse risks, such as those associated with key conglomerates and small and medium-sized financial institutions. The PBOC will maintain overall stability in the financial system and defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. First, the PBOC will maintain reasonable and stable growth in money and credit. By using a mix of monetary policy tools, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and ensure that the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE continue to be basically in line with nominal economic growth. It will support financial institutions meeting the effective financing needs of the real economy based on market principles and the rule of law, and it will make the growth of credit aggregates more stable and sustainable. Closely following economic and financial developments at home and abroad as well as the monetary policy shifts of the major central banks, the PBOC will strengthen monitoring and analysis of liquidity supply and demand and financial market movements so as to conduct open market operations in a flexible manner and further improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of operations. Second, the PBOC will bring into play the roles of structural monetary policy tools in motivating and guiding financial institutions. It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable to continue providing inclusive and sustainable funding support to agro-related businesses, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and private businesses. It will effectively implement the inclusive MSB lending facility to keep up financial support for MSBs and to back efforts to stabilize businesses and to secure employment. It will carry on implementation of the carbon emission reduction facility and special central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal, which encourage eligible financial institutions to provide funding at preferential interest rates to key projects that significantly reduce carbon emissions and in support of clean and efficient use of coal as well as coal-fired power. The PBOC will make effective use of special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and that for equipment upgrading to meet the relevant credit demand from the manufacturing sector, social services sectors, micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), and self-employed traders. Furthermore, it will continue to implement special central bank lending for inclusive elderly care services and that for transport and logistics sectors, put into operation facilities supporting interest rate cuts for inclusive MSB loans andtoll road loans, and move forward with implementation of the loan support scheme aimed at ensuring timely deliveries of presold homes. Third, the PBOC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. Continued efforts will be made to advance the project for enhancing the ability to provide financial services for MSMEs. The PBOC will guide financial institutions to accelerate the establishment of the long-term mechanism for boosting the confidence, willingness, capacity, and professionalism of financial institutions to lend to MSBs, and it will optimize the effectiveness assessment of the MSB credit policy orientation to further improve the quality and efficiency of financial services for MSBs. Focusing on the key fields of rural revitalization, the PBOC will ensure the provision of effective financial services for the production of grain and important agricultural products, step up financial support for revitalizing the seed industry, and maintain support for the efforts to advance rural revitalization across the board and to accelerate building up China’s strong agriculture. Additionally, the PBOC will push for quicker payments from policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments and timely issuances of supporting loans, and it will strengthen management of the existing facilities so that the funded projects will play their roles in boosting investment and stabilizing the macro economy. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBOC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance while taking concrete steps to ensure timely deliveries of presold homes, to secure the people’s livelihood, and to maintain stability. Moreover, it will meet reasonable financing needs of the real estate sector, promote restructurings, mergers, and acquisitions in the sector, and improve the balance sheets of the top high-quality developers. It will adopt city-specific measures to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, and it will offer home-related financial services to new urban residents and young people. All these efforts are aimed at ensuring the stable development of the real estate market. Fourth, the PBOC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms, and it will focus on domestic conditions while balancing internal and external equilibria. It will continue to advance the market-oriented interest rate reform and to smooth the channels for monetary policy transmission. It will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by optimizing the central bank policy rate system and guiding market rates to move around the policy rates. It will put into use the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments to stabilize bank liability costs. It will also tap into the LPR reform to help stabilize and bring down the financing costs for businesses and the costs ofconsumer credit for individuals. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBOC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. Letting the market play a decisive role in the formation of exchange rates, the PBOC will enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and strengthen expectation management. At the same time, it will uphold bottom-line thinking, duly conduct monitoring and analysis of cross-border capital flows, and stress risk prevention. By doing so, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level while giving play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. In addition, the PBOC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market. Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for MSMEs with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. Moreover, the PBOC will continue to advance RMB internationalization in an orderly manner. It will further expand use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepen international monetary cooperation, and promote the development of offshore RMB markets. It will carry on the pilot programs for high-standard opening-up of cross-border investment and trade, further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account and the institutional opening-up of financial markets. Fifth, the PBOC will make continued efforts to deepen the financial reforms, and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. The reform of development and policy financial institutions will move ahead, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based business management and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities so as to better play their important roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBOC will improve the legal system for the bond market and consolidate the legal basis for corporate credit bonds. It will accelerate the building of a multi-tiered bond market system and continue to expand the pilot programs for balance-based management and macro-prudential management of financial bonds. It will support the commercial banks in replenishing capital through multiple channels and improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment. Moreover, the PBOC will promote the development of the over-the-counter bond business in order to diversify the channels for bond investments, trading, custody, and settlement of small and medium-sized financial institutions, to increase bond market liquidity, and to contribute to the continuity and effectiveness of price formation in the secondary market. It will further improve the mechanisms for bond underwriting and market-making to enhance the synergy between the primary and secondary markets and the effectiveness of bondpricing as well as its function as a transmission channel. Adhering to market principles and the rule of law, the PBOC will continue to adopt a zero-tolerance approach by stepping up efforts to crack down on illegal and irregular conduct in the bond market. At the same time, it will remain firmly committed to advancing the opening-up of the bond market. Sixth, the PBOC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential policy framework as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning. It will also enrich the macro-prudential policy tools and steadily expand the coverage of the macro-prudential policy. The PBOC will improve regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will urge systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. Meanwhile, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve their total loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention ability. The PBOC will conduct access management of financial holding companies in a prudent and orderly manner. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate them, and the relevant regulatory system will be continuously improved to promote the sound, well-regulated, and sustainable development of financial holding companies. The PBOC will work toward more effective regulation, enhancing prudential regulation and conducting regulation of the financial sector on an on-going basis, and strengthen protection of consumers and investors. Furthermore, it will strengthen the financial legal system. More work will be done to improve and consolidate long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution in order to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is based on market principles and the rule of law. Meanwhile, the PBOC will keep a close watch on risks in key fields. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it will reduce existing risks and strictly guard against emerging risks while tightening prevention and control of financial and local debt risks. Additionally, the PBOC will further tap into the functions of deposit insurance for early corrections and risk resolution, continuously improve its abilities of risk monitoring and early warning, leverage the role of risk-differentiated premiums as both incentives and restraints, and enhance the authority of early corrections. Solid efforts will be made to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement corresponding measures. The PBOC will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards. It will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur.
