Summary The COVID-19 outbreak is causing  tremendous human and economic hardship  across the United States and around the world.  The virus and the measures taken to protect  public health have induced a sharp decline in  economic activity and a surge in job losses,  with the unemployment rate, which had been  at a 50-year low, soaring to a postwar record  high. Weaker demand and significantly lower  oil prices are holding down consumer price  inflation. The disruptions to economic activity  here and abroad significantly affected financial  conditions and impaired the flow of credit to  U.S. households and businesses. In response  to these developments, the Federal Reserve  quickly lowered its policy rate to close to  zero to support economic activity and took  extraordinary measures to stabilize markets  and bolster the flow of credit to households,  businesses, and communities. Financial  conditions have improved, in part reflecting  policy measures to support the economy and  the flow of credit. The Federal Reserve is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximumemployment and price-stability goals. Economic and Financial  Developments Economic activity. In response to the public  health emergency precipitated by the spread  of COVID-19, many protective measures were  adopted to limit the transmission of the virus.  These social-distancing measures effectively  closed parts of the economy, resulting in a  sudden and unprecedented fall in economic  activity and historic increases in joblessness.  Although virus mitigation efforts in many  places did not begin until the final two weeks of  March, real personal consumption expenditures  (PCE) plummeted 6.7 percent in March and an  unprecedented 13.2 percent in April. Indicators  suggest spending rose in May, but the April  data and May indicators taken together point  to a collapse in second-quarter real PCE.  Likewise, in the housing market, residential  sales and construction in April posted outsized  declines that are close to some of the largest  ever recorded, and heightened uncertainty  and weak demand have led many businesses  to put investment plans on hold or cancel  them outright. These data, along with other  information, suggest that real gross domestic  product will contract at a rapid pace in the  second quarter after tumbling at an annual rate  of 5 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The labor market. The severe economic  repercussions of the pandemic have been  especially visible in the labor market. Since  February, employers have shed nearly  20 million jobs from payrolls, reversing almost  10 years of job gains. The unemployment rate  jumped from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent  in February to a post–World War II high  of 14.7 percent in April and then moved  down to a still very elevated 13.3 percent  in May. The most severe job losses have  been sustained by those with lower earnings  and by the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among lowwage jobs. Inflation. Consumer price inflation has slowed  abruptly. The 12-month change in the price  index for PCE was just 0.5 percent in April.  The 12-month measure of PCE inflation that  excludes food and energy items (so-called  core inflation), which historically has been  a better indicator of where overall inflation  will be in the future than the total figure, fell  from 1.8 percent in February to 1.0 percent in  April. This slowing reflected monthly readings  for March and April that were especially  low because of large price declines in some  categories most directly affected by social  distancing. Overall inflation also has been held  down by substantially lower energy prices,  which more than offset the effects of surging  prices for food. Despite the sharp slowing in inflation, survey-based measures of longerrun inflation expectations have generally been  stable at relatively low levels. However, marketbased measures of inflation compensation have  moved down to some of the lowest readings  ever seen. Financial conditions. In late February and  over much of March as COVID-19 spread,  equity prices plunged and nominal Treasury  yields dropped substantially, with yields  on longer-term securities reaching all-time  record lows. Spreads of yields on corporate  bonds over those on comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened significantly as  the credit quality of firms declined and market  functioning deteriorated; in addition, loans  were unavailable for most firms, particularly  firms below investment grade. At the most  acute phase of this period, trading conditions  became extremely illiquid and some critical  markets stopped functioning properly.  Consumer borrowing also fell as spending  slumped. Several markets supporting consumer  lending experienced severe strains around  this period, including the agency residential  mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market  as well as the auto, credit card, and student  loan securitization markets. In response, the  Federal Reserve took unprecedented measures  to restore smooth market functioning and to  support the flow of credit in the economy,  including the creation of a number of  emergency credit and liquidity facilities.1  These  actions, along with the aggressive response  of fiscal policy, stabilized financial markets  and led to a notable improvement in financial  conditions for both firms and households as  well as state and local governments. Even so,  lending standards for both households and  businesses have become less accommodative,  and borrowing conditions are tight for low rated households and businesses. 1 A list of funding, credit, liquidity, and loan facilities  established by the Federal Reserve in response to  COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-andloan-facilities.htm. Financial stability. The COVID-19 pandemic  has abruptly halted large swaths of economic  activity and led to swift financial repercussions.  Despite increased resilience from the financial  and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably  those associated with liquidity and maturity  transformation in the nonbank financial  sector—have amplified some of the economic  effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected  to be significant in the near term. The strains  on household and business balance sheets  from the economic and financial shocks since  March will likely create persistent fragilities.  Financial institutions may experience strains  as a result. The Federal Reserve, with approval  of the Secretary of the Treasury, established  new credit and liquidity facilities under  section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to  alleviate severe dislocations that arose in a  number of financial markets and to support  the flow of credit to households, businesses,  and state and local governments. Furthermore,  as financial stresses abroad risked spilling  over into U.S. credit markets, the Federal  Reserve and several other central banks  announced the expansion and enhancement  of dollar liquidity swap lines. In addition, the  Federal Reserve introduced a new temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  monetary authorities. The Federal Reserve  has also made a number of adjustments to its  regulatory and supervisory regime to facilitate  market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected  by COVID-19. International developments. The spread of  COVID-19 throughout the world and the  measures taken to contain it have produced  devastating effects on the global economy.  Amid widespread and stringent shutdowns,  recent data suggest that global economic  activity in the first half of the year has  experienced a sharp and synchronized  contraction greater than that in the Global  Financial Crisis. The many mandated closures of nonessential businesses abroad and the  collapse in consumer demand contributed to  a significant deterioration in labor markets  and subdued inflation. Unlike past recessions,  services activity in the foreign economies has  dropped more sharply than manufacturing,  with restrictions on movement having  severely curtailed spending on travel, tourism,  restaurants, and recreation. Against this  backdrop, foreign governments and central  banks have responded strongly and swiftly  to support incomes and to improve market  liquidity and the provision of credit. More  recently, economic activity has begun to revive  in some foreign economies as authorities eased  social-distancing restraints. The rapid spread of COVID-19 weighed  heavily on global risk sentiment, with financial  stresses intensifying and liquidity conditions  deteriorating in many foreign financial  markets. Aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy responses in the United States and  abroad, however, helped boost sentiment and  improve market functioning. On balance,  financial conditions abroad remain tighter  than at the beginning of the year, especially  in some emerging market economies. Since  February, global equity prices moved lower,  sovereign interest rates in the European  periphery increased somewhat, and measures  of sovereign spreads in emerging market  economies widened significantly. In many  advanced economies, long-term interest rates  reached historically low levels. Monetary Policy Easing monetary policy. In light of the effects  of COVID-19 on economic activity and  on risks to the outlook, the FOMC rapidly  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate. Specifically, at two meetings in March,  the FOMC lowered the target range for the  federal funds rate by a total of 1½ percentage  points, bringing it to the current range of 0 to  ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain  this target range until it is confident that the  economy has weathered recent events and is on  track to achieve its maximum-employment and  price-stability goals. The Committee noted that  it would continue to monitor the implications  of incoming information for the economic  outlook, including information related to  public health, as well as global developments  and muted inflation pressures, and that it  would use its tools and act as appropriate to  support the economy. Safeguarding market functioning. Market  functioning deteriorated in many markets  in late February and much of March,  including the critical Treasury and agency  MBS markets. The Federal Reserve swiftly  took a series of policy actions to address  these developments. The FOMC announced  it would purchase Treasury securities and  agency MBS in the amounts needed to  ensure smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy  to broader financial conditions. The Open  Market Desk began offering large-scale  overnight and term repurchase agreement  operations. The Federal Reserve coordinated  with other central banks to enhance the  provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  announced the establishment of temporary  U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap  lines) with additional central banks. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  and international monetary authorities.  (Separately, the Board introduced several  facilities with the backing of the U.S. Treasury  to more directly support the flow of credit to  the economy.) Since these policy actions were  announced, the functioning of Treasury and  MBS markets has gradually improved. Reflecting these policy  responses, the size of the Federal Reserve’s  balance sheet increased significantly.  Fed Listens. The Federal Reserve has released a  report on its Fed Listens initiative. This initiative  is part of a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices  the Federal Reserve uses to pursue its statutory  dual-mandate goals of maximum employment  and price stability. A key component of the  review was a series of public Fed Listens events  aimed at consulting with a broad range of  stakeholders in the U.S. economy on issues  pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives. Special Topics Disparities in job loss during the pandemic. The deterioration in labor market conditions  since February has been sudden, severe, and  widespread. At the same time, workers in  some industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations have experienced  more significant employment declines than  others. Although disparities in labor market  outcomes often arise during recessions, factors  unique to this episode have also contributed  to the recent divergence. Job losses have been  especially severe for those with lower earnings  and for the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among lowwage jobs. Small businesses during the COVID-19 crisis. Small businesses make up nearly half of U.S.  private-sector employment and play key  roles in local communities. The pandemic  poses acute risks to the survival of many  small businesses. Their widespread failure  would adversely alter the economic landscape  of local communities and potentially slow  the economic recovery and future labor  productivity growth. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies  are making aggressive efforts to support small  businesses.  Federal fiscal policy response to COVID-19. While the economic consequences resulting  from the pandemic have been historically  large, the amount of fiscal support that has  been enacted constitutes the fastest and largest  fiscal response to any postwar economic  downturn. The pieces of legislation enacted  since the arrival of the pandemic that have  composed this response are expected to raise  government outlays and reduce tax revenues  by nearly $2 trillion in the current fiscal year.  Policy response to COVID-19 in foreign  economies. Authorities in many foreign  economies have implemented fiscal,  monetary, and regulatory measures to  mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Sizable fiscal packages targeted  the sudden loss of income by firms and  households. Actions by central banks,  including purchases of sovereign and  private bonds, have aimed to restore market  functioning, sustain the provision of credit  to businesses and households during the  pandemic, and support the economic recovery.  Regulatory changes have focused on ensuring  that banks sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to  lend to households and firms.  Domestic Developments The COVID-19 outbreak has led to an  acute weakening in the labor market  since February  In response to the public health crisis caused  by the spread of COVID-19, households,  businesses, and governments took dramatic  measures to slow the spread of the virus. As  a result, many sectors of the economy were  effectively closed from mid-March through  April but have seen some gradual lifting of  restrictions since then. The severity, scope, and  speed of the ensuing downturn in economic  activity have been significantly worse than any  recession since World War II. After posting  strong gains in both January and February,  payroll employment plummeted by an  unprecedented 22 million in March and April  before adding back 2.5 million jobs in May  (figure 1). The unemployment rate jumped to  14.7 percent in April, the highest level since the  Great Depression. In May, the unemployment  rate fell to 13.3 percent, which was almost  10 percentage points above the February level. Although unemployment soared  for all major racial and ethnic groups, the  unemployment rate for Hispanics posted the  largest increase over this period.  Data received since the survey week for payroll  employment in May suggest that job gains  have continued.  Although initial claims for unemployment insurance have remained  high, it is unclear whether these new claims  reflect additional large numbers of layoffs  or that states are clearing their backlogs of  applications. In addition, weekly employment  data from the payroll processor ADP indicate  that rehiring has continued and that payroll  employment will likely move up again in June,  albeit from what remains a very low level. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)— the share of the population that is either  working or actively looking for work—fell  from around 63½ percent early this year  to 60.8 percent in May. The May  LFPR reading was one of the lowest since the  early 1970s.  Poor employment prospects or  concerns about safety in the workplace might  have caused some of the newly unemployed  to exit the labor force or induced others to  refrain from entering.  However, with so much of the labor market shut in and most new  hiring at a standstill, the distinction between  being unemployed and out of the labor  force likely has become especially blurred.  The employment-to-population ratio for  individuals 16 and over—the share of that  segment of the population who are working— combines movements in both unemployment  and labor force participation. This measure  was 51.3 percent in April and 52.8 percent in  May, the lowest readings in the history of this  series, which began in 1948. Wages are likely being held down,  although compositional shifts have  temporarily boosted some wage measures While reliable data are limited, anecdotal  evidence suggests that the economic downturn  is putting downward pressure on wages.  The series on wage growth computed by the  Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which  tracks the median 12-month wage growth  of individuals reporting to the Current  Population Survey, has changed little in  recent months (figure 5).  In contrast,  measures that look at average wage costs have  jumped because of compositional effects,  as COVID-19 mitigation efforts and weaker  demand have disproportionately affected  lower-wage workers and left relatively more  higher-wage workers on payrolls. Indeed,  average hourly earnings from the payroll  survey jumped 6.7 percent over the 12 months  ending in May, largely reflecting this change in  the composition of private payrolls. In the first  quarter, both the employment cost index (ECI)  and compensation per hour, which include  both wages and benefits, posted moderate workers who expect them to be temporary.  Research  has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer fi nancial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations. gains, with neither series reflecting much of the  pandemic’s repercussions. Price inflation has moved significantly lower As measured by the 12-month change in  the price index for personal consumption  expenditures (PCE), inflation was just  0.5 percent in April, compared with 1.6 percent  over the same period a year ag. The  abrupt slowing in total PCE price inflation this  year partly reflects sharp declines in consumer  energy prices that resulted from the collapse in  oil prices. In contrast, food prices have moved  higher despite declines in food commodity  prices, likely reflecting higher demand at retail  grocery stores in combination with pandemic-related supply chain issues. In addition to  the drop in energy prices, the unprecedented  reductions in demand for some services as a  result of social distancing have led to sharp  drops in prices for airfares and lodging away  from home. These price declines led the  12-month measure of core PCE inflation—that  is, inflation excluding volatile consumer food  and energy prices—to move significantly lower,  falling from 1.8 percent in February to just  1.0 percent in April, as the monthly readings  for March and April were exceptionally  low. An appreciation of the dollar has also  contributed to the slowing in core inflation.  The trimmed mean measure of PCE price  inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Dallas provides an alternative way  to purge measured inflation of transitory  influences, and it is less sensitive than the core  measure to extreme price movements such  as the recent outsized swings in airfares and  lodging.  The 12-month change in this measure edged down to 1.9 percent in April from  2.1 percent in February. Oil prices are notably lower this spring Against the backdrop of a global collapse  in the demand for oil and a rapid increase in  oil inventories, the Brent price of crude oil  plunged from about $65 per barrel in early  January to around $20 per barrel at the end  of April.   More recently, prices  have rebounded to about $40 per barrel, as  an agreement between OPEC (Organization  of the Petroleum Exporting Countries)  and Russia to cut oil production by nearly  10 percent of global output appears to have  taken effect. Additionally, the dramatic  downturn in global oil demand appears to  be abating as countries begin to ease their  COVID-19 lockdown policies. The decline  in oil prices has contributed to similar  movements in retail gasoline prices, which have  also fallen in recent months. Reported prices of imports other than  energy fell After rising early this year, nonfuel import  prices fell in April, as the dollar appreciated  and the sharp decline in global demand put  downward pressure on non-oil commodity  prices—a substantial component of nonfuel  import prices. Prices of industrial  metals fell sharply in the first months of the  year but edged up in May, as economic activity  in some economies began to revive. However, survey-based measures of  long-run inflation expectations have been  broadly stable . . .  Despite the tumultuous situation of recent  months, survey-based measures of inflation  expectations at medium- and longer-term  horizons, which likely influence actual  inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting  decisions, so far have changed little.  In the University of Michigan Surveys of  Consumers, the median value for inflation  expectations over the next 5 to 10 years was  2.7 percent in May and has fluctuated around  2½ percent since the end of 2016. In the  Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted  by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,  the median of respondents’ expected inflation  rate three years ahead moved lower, on net, in  the second half of last year and has averaged  2.5 percent since. In the Survey of Professional  Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation  for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price  index over the next 10 years edged down to  1.9 percent in the second-quarter survey, below  the 2 percent level that had been reported for  some time. . . . but market-based measures of  inflation compensation are notably lower Market-based measures of inflation  compensation can also be used to make  inferences about inflation expectations.  However, the inference is not straightforward  because market-based measures can be  importantly affected by changes in premiums  that provide compensation for bearing  inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of  longer-term inflation compensation—derived  either from differences between yields on  nominal Treasury securities and those on  comparable-maturity Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation  swaps—have decreased, on net, since the  end of 2019. The 5-year and  5-to-10-year-forward measures of inflation  compensation are about 60 basis points and  40 basis points lower, respectively, than at the beginning of the year.  Both measures dropped  sharply in March, with the 5-year measure  reaching the lowest level since the Global  Financial Crisis and the 5-to-10-year measure  hitting new historical lows. These declines  partly reflected a reduction in the relative  liquidity of TIPS compared with nominal  Treasury securities. As liquidity improved,  inflation compensation partially retraced. The  TIPS-based measure of 5-to-10-year-forward  inflation compensation and the analogous  measure from inflation swaps are now about  1½ percent and 1¾ percent, respectively. Real gross domestic product has  contracted severely and with  unprecedented speed  After posting a moderate gain in 2019, real  gross domestic product (GDP) fell at an  annual rate of 5 percent in the first quarter,  with that decline likely all occurring in the final  weeks of the quarter (figure 11). In the second  quarter, real GDP appears to be plummeting at  a breathtaking pace. Indeed, many professional  forecasters are projecting second-quarter  real GDP to fall at an annual rate of 30 to  40 percent. This severe contraction reflects a  steep drop in consumer spending associated  with measures to contain the spreading virus.  Uncertainty about the economic outlook  also likely has pushed down business fixed  investment, and events abroad have led to a  steep drop in exports. In the manufacturing  sector, output fell sharply in March and posted  its largest decline on record in April as many  factories closed temporarily for all or most of both months. This decrease in factory output  included nearly all motor vehicle and civilian  aircraft manufacturers. However, amid some  easing of restrictions, there are signs that  manufacturing activity moved up in May,  partly as a result of the ramp-up in automotive  production. Social distancing has led to a dramatic  plunge in household spending and  earnings  After having increased at a solid 2.7 percent  pace in 2019, real PCE fell at an annual rate  of 6.8 percent in the first quarter of 2020, one  of the largest quarterly drops in the history  of this series. As concerns about  the virus outbreak grew and government  restrictions mounted, real PCE collapsed,  falling 6.7 percent in March and a record  13.2 percent in April. Although indicators  point to an increase in May—which is  consistent with some relaxation of government  restrictions—taken together, the April data  and May indicators point to an unprecedented  decline in second-quarter consumer outlays.  Real disposable personal income (DPI), a  measure of households’ after-tax purchasing  power, fell in the first quarter, mostly because  of a drop in household income from wages  and salaries. However, in April, real DPI  jumped 13½ percent, pushing its April level  up relative to the fourth quarter at an annual  rate of more than 30 percent. Although  aggregate earnings from employment  collapsed in April, this income loss was more  than offset by government income support  from unemployment insurance and stimulus  payments.12 With households unwilling or  unable to spend a commensurate amount of  their available aggregate income, the April  saving rate shot up to 33 percent. Consumer sentiment has tumbled . . . Households’ concerns about their economic  situation, as reflected in consumer sentiment,  may be leading them to save more for  precautionary reasons. The University of  Michigan Surveys of Consumers index of  consumer sentiment dropped almost 29 points  between February and May, with  declines in both the current and expected  conditions indexes. The Conference Board  survey measure in May also was down sharply  from February, with respondents similarly  grim about current prospects but somewhat  more upbeat than in the Michigan survey  about future conditions.  . . . and overall household wealth fell in  the first quarter  In the first quarter, the ratio of aggregate  household net worth to household income  fell, driven by sharp declines in equity prices. House prices—which tend to  respond to economic developments more  slowly than equity prices and are of particular  importance for the value of assets held by a  large portion of households—continued to  increase in the first quarter and moved up  further in April. Since March,  equity prices have posted sizable gains but are  still below their February peak.  Consumer lending standards have  become less accommodative, but credit  is still available to households with strong  credit profiles  Since the onset of the pandemic, consumer  lending standards have become less  accommodative on balance. Borrowing  conditions are tight for individuals with low  credit ratings, but credit remains available to  those with strong credit profiles. Nevertheless,  consumer borrowing has fallen as spending  has slumped. While banks have  tightened lending standards on credit card and  auto loans, according to the April Senior Loan  Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending  Practices (SLOOS), captive auto lenders have  rolled out generous loan incentives to boost sales. Due to the high cost of servicing  loans in forbearance and uncertainty about  whether borrowers will be able to resume  making payments when the forbearance period  ends, mortgages have become hard to obtain  for borrowers with low credit scores or with  incomes that are difficult to document. Credit  conditions have also tightened significantly for  other higher-risk loans, such as jumbo loans  and cash-out refinances, and the increase in  costs and risks associated with originating  mortgages has raised primary mortgage rates  relative to yields on mortgage-backed securities  (MBS). Nevertheless, mortgage rates currently  have fluctuated around the lowest levels seen in  the past 10 years.  Housing-sector activity has fallen sharply  after starting the year on a solid footing . . . After turning up starting around the middle  of 2019 as mortgage rates moved lower, new  home sales, existing home sales, and singlefamily starts and permits have posted outsized  declines beginning in March that are all  close to the largest ever recorded. Similarly, the COVID-19 outbreak  and mitigation efforts have caused households’  perceptions of homebuying conditions and  builders’ ratings of current sales to move down  despite historically low mortgage rates.  . . . and business fixed investment has  tumbled . . .  The pandemic has curtailed business  investment, as many investment projects were  delayed or canceled because of lower profit  expectations, concerns about future demand,  reduced credit availability, and uncertainty  about how businesses will operate in the  future. Real business fixed investment—that is,  private expenditures for equipment, structures,  research and development (R&D), and other  intellectual property—contracted at an annual  rate of about 8.0 percent in the first quarter  of 2020, coming off a drop of 0.4 percent  for 2019 as a whol. The decline  was centered in equipment investment as well as in outlays for nonresidential buildings. In  addition, lower oil prices contributed to a drop  in investment in drilling and mining structures.  Investment in intellectual property like  software, R&D, and entertainment originals  recorded a tepid increase in the first quarter  after posting solid gains in 2019. Forwardlooking indicators of business spending, such  as new orders of nondefense capital goods,  excluding the volatile aircraft category, have  plunged recently amid sharply lower business  sentiment and profit expectations from  industry analysts.  . . . while corporate financing conditions  have deteriorated  Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms  were robust early in the year but tumbled  during the global spread of COVID-19. The gross issuance of corporate  bonds in the investment-grade segment was  solid until late February, when it became  intermittent at best as market functioning  deteriorated. Meanwhile, issuance in the  speculative-grade segment was essentially  nonexistent following the broad risk-off  sentiment in the market over the public  health crisis. While investment-grade issuance  recovered at a strong pace following the  March Federal Reserve announcement on  corporate credit funding facilities, high-yield  issuance began to pick up only after the  April announcement to expand the facilities  to include support for some recent “fallen  angels”—bonds downgraded to a speculative grade credit rating from an investment-grade  rating because of declining credit quality— and high-yield exchange-traded funds. The  solvency outlook of corporate bonds for  both the investment- and speculative-grade  segments of the market dropped over the first half of the year as the pace of downgrades  intensified and the volume of defaults picked  up. Furthermore, the monthly volume of  fallen angels reached a record high in March,  and market analysts forecast this trend to  continue with a record annual volume of  debt being downgraded to high yield this  year amid declining earnings and elevated  leverage. Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury securities  have widened substantially amid worsening  credit conditions. Institutional leveraged  loan issuance volume was robust to start the  first quarter, but it subsequently came to a  standstill in March because of the pandemic.  Newly launched volume increased somewhat  starting in April but remains at subdued  levels. Banks tightened standards and terms  significantly on commercial and industrial  (C&I) loans, according to respondents to  the April SLOOS, and demand for C&I  loans strengthened amid concerns about the  pandemic. C&I loan growth at banks has  picked up in the first half of the year, largely  driven by soaring credit-line drawdowns  since the beginning of March, as firms with  existing credit lines sought to increase their  internal cash buffers, and by lending to smaller  businesses through the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) since April. Both exports and imports declined  sharply in the first quarter The sudden drop in global demand and  production and stifled global value chains took  a toll on international trade. U.S. real exports  of goods and services in the first quarter  declined at an annual rate of nearly 9 percent,  as exports of services—including travel to  the United States—plunged. Real  imports fell just over 15 percent, as U.S.  consumers and firms cut back on spending,  travel abroad halted, and shipments of  imported goods were delayed. The trade deficit, relative to GDP, narrowed in the first  quarter compared with 2019. Federal fiscal stimulus will provide  substantial support to economic activity  in 2020 while also significantly boosting  the budget deficit and debt . . . Federal fiscal policy measures enacted in  response to the pandemic have provided  income support for households and businesses;  increased grants-in-aid to state and local  governments; and facilitated loans to  businesses, households, states, and localities.  The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)  projects that in fiscal year 2020, the additional  federal government expenditures and foregone  revenues from these policies will total more  than $2 trillion, around 10 percent of nominal  GDP.16 (For a more detailed discussion of  these policies, see the box “Federal Fiscal  Policy Response to COVID-19.”) In addition,  the decline in economic activity has pushed  down tax collections while pushing up outlays  for certain transfer programs—most notably  for unemployment insurance and Medicaid. These tax decreases and transfer increases, working in tandem with the  discretionary stimulus, will support aggregate  demand and help blunt the extent of the  economic downturn.  The combination of the discretionary stimulus  measures and the response of receipts and  expenditures to the decline in economic  activity—referred to as automatic stabilizers— are expected to cause the budget deficit to  balloon from its already elevated level. The  CBO expects the federal unified budget deficit  to widen from 4½ percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2019 to 18 percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2020, the largest annual deficit as a  share of GDP in the post–World War II era. The ratio of federal debt held by the public  to nominal GDP is expected to rise from  79 percent in fiscal 2019 to 101 percent by the  end of fiscal 2020, the highest debt-to-GDP  ratio since 1947. . . . and state and local governments  confront a fiscal crisis as tax  revenue shrinks A sharp reduction in tax revenues due to  a collapse in income and retail sales tax  revenue is placing significant stress on state  governments. Local governments, which rely  on more cyclically stable property taxes, will be  somewhat less directly affected. Nevertheless,  local governments rely on aid from their  state governments, particularly for primary  and secondary education, and the budget  strains at the state level will therefore likely be  passed down to localities. In April and May,  state and local governments shed more than  1½ million jobs as schools and universities  closed early and local governments reduced  their noneducation workforce. These state  and local budget strains will be partially offset  by grants from the federal government. (See  the box “Federal Fiscal Policy Response to  COVID-19” for further details.) Risks to the outlook are greater than usual The path ahead is extraordinarily uncertain.  First and foremost, the pace of recovery will  ultimately depend on the evolution of the  COVID-19 outbreak in the United States  and abroad and the measures undertaken to  contain it. Importantly, some small businesses  and highly leveraged firms might have to shut  down permanently or declare bankruptcy,  which could have longer-lasting repercussions  on productive capacity. (For a more in-depth  discussion of the potential consequences of  the shutdowns on small businesses, see the  box “Small Businesses during the COVID-19  Crisis.”) In addition, there is uncertainty about  future labor demand and productivity as firms  shift their production processes to increase  worker safety, realign their supply chains,  or move services online. Furthermore, if  employees are not called back to their former  jobs, their period of unemployment could  increase, potentially leading to lower wages  when they do eventually find a job. Finally,  applications for employer identification  numbers, which are an early indicator of new  business formations, are tracking well below  levels from recent years and may suggest a  slower pace of future job creation through  this channel.  Financial Developments The expected path of the federal funds  rate over the next several years has fallen  to near zero The expected path of the federal funds rate  over the next several years has declined since  early January and is now flat at the effective  lower bound for the next few years.  Before the Federal Reserve lowered the  target range for the federal funds rate to 0  to ¼ percent in March, policy expectations  dropped substantially in late February  and early March as COVID-19 concerns  intensified. Market-based measures suggest  that the expected federal funds rate remains  below 0.25 percent through mid-2023.18 Survey-based measures of the expected path  of the policy rate also moved down from the  levels observed at the end of 2019. According  to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers  and Survey of Market Participants, both  conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York in April, the median of respondents’  modal projections implies a flat trajectory for  the target range of the federal funds rate at the  effective lower bound for the next few years. The U.S. nominal Treasury yield curve has  shifted down sharply . . . After moving lower over the second half of  2019, nominal Treasury yields fell sharply in  late February and early March as investors’  concerns regarding the implications of  the COVID-19 outbreak for the economic  outlook led to both falling policy expectations  and flight-to-safety flows, with longer term Treasury security yields dropping to  historically low levels. Longer term yields increased moderately and realized  volatility spiked for a period in March as  selling pressures grew, leading to dealer  balance sheet capacity constraints and  impaired trading conditions, before falling  back again after the Federal Reserve’s actions  helped restore smooth market functioning.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and  MBS Markets” in Part 2 for a more detailed  description of the Treasury market during  March.) More recently, yields on longer-term  Treasury securities rose somewhat, linked at  least partially to the expected increase in the  issuance of longer-term Treasury securities  as well as some improvement in investor  sentiment. Options prices suggest that near term uncertainty about longer-dated Treasury  yields rose sharply in March to levels not  seen since the Global Financial Crisis before  retracing. . . . but spreads of other long-term debt  to Treasury securities rose  Yields on 30-year agency MBS—an important  determinant of mortgage interest rates— decreased somewhat, on balance, though less  than the yields on nominal Treasury securities,  since the start of the year and remained very  low by historical standards.  Early in the year, yields on both investment and speculative-grade corporate bonds as  well as primary- and secondary-market  municipal bonds were near record lows.  Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury yields  were in the lower end of their historical  distribution. Since mid-February, corporate  spreads have increased appreciably as market  functioning deteriorated and credit quality  declined. In March, spreads to comparable maturity Treasury securities increased sharply  for corporate debt but remained below those  observed during the 2008 Global Financial  Crisis. Spreads started to normalize following  the Federal Reserve announcements of  corporate bond facilities in late March,  particularly for investment-grade corporate  debt, but remain higher than at the end  of 2019. Similarly, yields and spreads for  municipal debt rose strikingly in March, with  spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury  securities spiking to their highest level since the  Global Financial Crisis as market functioning  declined and concerns about municipal  credit quality arose. Yields on municipal debt  partially recovered following Federal Reserve  announcements in late March and April of  support to municipal debt markets through  liquidity facilities.  Liquidity in markets for Treasury  securities and mortgage-backed securities  deteriorated sharply before recovering  following various Federal Reserve actions A number of indicators of Treasury market  functioning—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, estimates of transaction costs, and  measures of market depth—deteriorated  significantly in late February and March, but  conditions improved considerably following  Federal Reserve asset purchases and the  creation of credit and liquidity facilities. Bid-ask spreads remain  higher than those seen at the end of the year  in the off-the-run market and for the 30-year  bond in the on-the-run market, and market  depth remains low. MBS spreads have fallen  back markedly, but prepayment risk and  uncertainty about forbearance continue to put  upward pressure on spreads. Strains remain in  some less liquid parts of the market.  Broad equity prices dropped notably  amid the global spread of COVID-19  before rebounding  Equity prices continued to increase early in the  year before tumbling in March, dropping as  much as 34 percent from peak to trough. Prices  have mostly recovered against a background  of unprecedented, forceful, and rapid  monetary and fiscal policy responses as well  as recent tentative signs of economic revival  associated with the easing of restrictions and  in the face of bleak forecasts for U.S. firms’  earnings in 2020. The decline in  stock prices was widespread across all sectors,  with the largest declines in the energy and  banking sectors. Measures of implied and  realized stock price volatility for the S&P  500 index—the VIX and the 20-day realized  volatility—spiked to levels that were most  recently observed during the financial crisis.  They have since retraced much of  that increase but remain at elevated levels. (For  a discussion of financial stability issues, see  the box “Developments Related to Financial  Stability.”) While overnight money market rates  generally moved down in line with  decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s target range, short-term  funding markets experienced strains  before the announcement and launch of  Federal Reserve facilities Decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s (FOMC) target range for the  federal funds rate in March transmitted  effectively through overnight money markets,  with yields on a broad set of money market  instruments moving lower in response to  the FOMC’s policy actions. Over the first  half of the year, the effective federal funds  rate (EFFR) remained within the target  range. After printing at the top  of the target range for a few days following  the March 15 rate cut, the EFFR softened  considerably to trade near the bottom of the  range amid substantial increases in reserves.  Though upward pressures on interest rates  in overnight money markets were generally  well contained during March, short-term  funding markets experienced a liquidity  squeeze. Certain other short-term interest  rates, including those pertaining to commercial  paper and negotiable certificates of deposit,  moved up markedly. However, since the  announcement and launch of the Federal  Reserve liquidity facilities directed toward  these markets, short-term funding rates have  declined significantly.  Bank credit continued to expand, while  bank profitability declined Aggregate credit provided by commercial  banks trended up through the first half of  2020, driven largely by soaring C&I credit line drawdowns since early March and by  loans originated under the PPP since April.  While commercial real estate loan  growth remained strong, growth in residential  real estate loans on banks’ balance sheets has  slowed since the beginning of the year, and  outstanding consumer loans contracted in April. First-quarter earnings reports of larger  banks indicate that bank profitability declined  considerably in the first quarter of 2020  because of narrower net interest margins and  notable increases in loan loss provisions.20 International Developments  Economic activity abroad plunged in the  first half of the year The spread of COVID-19 throughout the  world and the measures taken to contain it  have produced devastating effects on the global  economy. Many countries closed nonessential  businesses and restricted people’s movement  during the first months of the year, leading  to a sharp global economic contraction.  Foreign GDP declined at about a 13 percent  annualized rate in the first quarter, and recent  indicators point to an even larger contraction  in the second quarter. Available  data suggest that the decline in foreign activity  in the first half of the year has been greater  than during the Global Financial Crisis. The collapse in economic activity across  countries followed the progression of the  virus. In China, where regions underwent  strict lockdowns as early as January, GDP  in the first quarter dropped at a stunning  36 percent annualized rate. As the  virus spread to Europe, many countries in  the region imposed strict social-distancing  restrictions; euro-area GDP contracted nearly  14 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The  substantial decline in commodity prices also  depressed activity of commodity exporters  such as Canada and several Latin American  countries. Recent data indicate that Chinese  production began to revive in the spring,  as infection rates fell and restrictions were gradually lifted. Indicators of  Chinese consumption, however, remain weak.  A number of advanced foreign economies  (AFEs) began to relax social-distancing  restraints in recent weeks. Labor market conditions deteriorated and  inflation fell . . . Amid widespread business closures and  collapsing demand, labor market conditions  abroad have deteriorated sharply in recent  months, albeit with differences across  countries. Several European and Asian  countries have thus far experienced sizable  declines in hours worked but relatively small  increases in unemployment given the size  of the drop in economic activity, partly  reflecting direct wage subsidies provided by the  governments to keep workers on firms’ payrolls.  In other countries, unemployment  rates increased markedly.  Although the shutdowns across the world  have reduced the global supply of goods and  services, the depressive effects on demand of  lower income, social distancing, and increased  uncertainty have predominated, driving down  inflation in the foreign economies. In several  AFEs, recent inflation readings have been well  below central bank targets, reflecting large  declines in energy prices as well as subdued  core inflation. . . . prompting swift and substantial  policy responses Foreign fiscal authorities have aimed to fill  income gaps resulting from businesses closing  and workers staying home. Many national  governments acted decisively to support firms’  balance sheets through tax deferrals, loans,  and loan guarantees; to encourage firms to  retain workers through wage subsidies; and to  support household spending through enhanced  unemployment benefits and cash transfers.  In addition, many foreign central banks  reduced their policy rates, initiated or  enhanced credit facilities, and relaxed capital requirements for financial institutions.  Several AFE central banks also ramped  up asset purchase programs to alleviate  liquidity strains in their domestic capital  markets. Some emerging market economy  (EME) central banks followed suit. See  the box “Policy Response to COVID-19 in  Foreign Economies” for a more detailed  discussion of fiscal and monetary policies  implemented abroad. Downside risks remain high Despite aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy actions, risks abroad are skewed to  the downside. The future progression of the  pandemic remains highly uncertain, with  resurgence of the outbreak a substantial  risk. In addition, the economic damage of  the recession may be quite persistent. The  collapse in demand may ultimately bankrupt  many businesses, thereby reducing business  dynamism and innovation. Unlike past  recessions, services activity has dropped  more sharply than manufacturing—with  restrictions on movement severely curtailing  expenditures on travel, tourism, restaurants,  and recreation—and social-distancing  requirements and attitudes may further weigh  on the recovery in these sectors. Disruptions  to global trade may also result in a costly  reconfiguration of global supply chains.  Persistently weak consumer and firm demand  may push medium- and longer-term inflation  expectations well below central bank targets,  particularly in regions with already low  inflation at the onset of the recession. Finally,  additional expansionary fiscal policies— possibly in response to future large-scale  outbreaks of COVID-19—could significantly  increase government debt and add to sovereign  risk, especially for countries with already  limited fiscal space.  Financial conditions abroad tightened,  especially in some emerging market  economies The precipitous spread of COVID-19 in the  first months of the year weighed heavily on global risk sentiment, and many financial  markets suffered from severe illiquidity.  Aggressive fiscal and monetary policy  responses in the United States and abroad,  however, helped boost sentiment and improve  market functioning, contributing to a partial  retracement. On net, financial conditions  abroad remain tighter than at the beginning of  the year, especially in some EMEs.  Financial conditions in the AFEs largely  tracked financial market developments in the  United States. Major AFE equity indexes  dropped substantially as news about the spread  of COVID-19 and the associated measures  to contain it were reported, but those indexes  rebounded following the announcement of  extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy  actions and, more recently, tentative signs  of economic stabilization.  Notwithstanding temporary increases due to  poor market functioning, long-term sovereign  yields in major advanced economies fell, on  net, as flight-to-safety demand surged, policy  rates reached their effective lower bounds in  several countries, and expectations of future  policy rates declined markedly.  Sovereign interest rates for economies in the  euro-area periphery were sensitive to news  about the size and form of European-wide  fiscal support for the recovery and, on net,  remain a bit higher than at the beginning of  the year. In recent months, Fitch  and DBRS Morningstar downgraded Italy’s  long-term debt ratings. Financial conditions in some EMEs tightened,  especially in Latin American countries. Equity  indexes suffered widespread losses early in  the year, and rebounds since then have been  uneven across countries. While equity indexes  in emerging Asia partially recovered, Mexican  and Brazilian equity indexes underperformed  other EME equities. In March,  borrowing rates for corporations increased  to levels not seen since the Global Financial  Crisis, although they have subsequently  declined somewhat. In the first half of the  year, funds dedicated to investing in EMEs experienced outflows, and sovereign borrowing  spreads increased sharply before moving down  more recently. The tightening in  some EME financial conditions appears to  reflect investors’ preference for safe and liquid  assets; a reduced confidence in the ability  of some governments to contain the health  crisis; and heightened uncertainty about the  prospects for EME public finances, commodity  prices, and global trade. The dollar appreciated The foreign exchange value of the dollar  increased nearly 5 percent since the start of  the year, as the boost from safe-haven demand  outweighed the effects of lower U.S. interest  rates. On a trade-weighted basis,  the dollar increased about 1.5 percent against  AFE currencies and 7 percent against EME  currencies. The Mexican peso and Brazilian  real depreciated about 16 percent and  30 percent, respectively, partly in response to  lower commodity prices. The Chinese renminbi  fluctuated largely in response to news about  the outbreak and policy actions of Chinese  authorities and, on net, depreciated slightly  since the beginning of the year. The Federal Open Market Committee  quickly reduced the federal funds rate to  the effective lower bound . . . In light of the effects of COVID-19 on the  economy and on risks to the outlook, the  Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate by a total of 1½ percentage points—from  a range of 1½ to 1¾ percent to one of 0 to  ¼ percent—over two meetings in early and  mid-March.21 Specifically, in early  March, the Committee lowered the target  range for the federal funds rate ½ percentage  point, to 1 to 1¼ percent. In mid-March, the  Committee further lowered the target range  1 percentage point, to 0 to ¼ percent. The  Committee expects to maintain this target  range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to  achieve its maximum-employment and price stability goals. In connection with the changes  in the target range, the Federal Reserve  reduced the interest paid on reserve balances  and decreased the interest rate offered on  overnight reverse repurchase agreements at the  two March meetings. . . . and the FOMC increased the holdings  of Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities in the System  Open Market Account At its mid-March meeting, along with its  decision to lower the target range for the  federal funds rate, the FOMC emphasized  that it is prepared to use its full range of tools  to support the flow of credit to households  and businesses, thereby promoting its  maximum-employment and price-stability  goals. To support the smooth functioning of  markets for Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—markets  central to the flow of credit to households and businesses—the Committee announced  that it would increase its holdings of  Treasury securities by at least $500 billion  and its holdings of agency MBS by at least  $200 billion over coming months.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury  and MBS Markets.”) Later in March,  the Committee announced that it would  continue to purchase Treasury securities  and agency MBS in the amounts needed to  support smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy to  broader financial condition. The  Committee also included agency commercial  MBS in its purchases for the first time. In  June, the Committee announced that, over  coming months, the Federal Reserve will  increase its holdings of Treasury securities  and agency residential and commercial MBS  at least at the current pace to sustain smooth  market functioning, thereby fostering effective  transmission of monetary policy to broader  financial conditions.  The Federal Reserve has continued rolling  over at auction all principal payments from its  holdings of Treasury securities. Before mid-March, to allow for a gradual runoff  of agency securities, the Federal Reserve  reinvested principal payments from agency  debt and agency MBS of up to $20 billion per  month in Treasury securities; agency MBS  principal payments in excess of $20 billion  each month were reinvested in agency MBS.  Beginning in mid-March, the Committee  announced it would reinvest all principal  payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings  of agency debt and agency MBS back into  agency MBS. (The box “Developments on the  Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” discusses  changes in the size and composition of the  Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the  past year.) The Federal Reserve eased lending terms  for primary credit borrowing . . . Primary credit is the Federal Reserve lending  program available to depository institutions  in generally sound financial condition. Amid  increasing stress in funding markets in midMarch, the Federal Reserve announced  several changes to the primary credit program.  Importantly, the primary credit rate was set at  the top of the target range for the federal funds  rate rather than 50 basis points above the top  of the range. The term of primary credit loans,  which had previously been mainly overnight  advances, was extended to allow depository  institutions to borrow for up to 90 days.  Federal Reserve communication encouraged  the use of the discount window to help meet  the demand for credit from households and  businesses. Discount window borrowing under the  primary credit program increased significantly  following these developments. Primary  credit outstanding reached a peak of around  $50 billion in late March 2020—its highest  level since the financial crisis and well above  the typical level of around $10 million that  prevailed in 2019. Use of primary credit was  fairly widespread, with discount window loans  being extended to institutions across a range  of size categories. Overall, the outstanding  amount of primary credit loans declined to  about $10 billion by early June. . . . and undertook actions with other  central banks to support U.S. dollar  funding markets The Federal Reserve announced coordinated  actions with other central banks to enhance  the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  the establishment of temporary U.S. dollar  liquidity arrangements (swap lines) with  nine additional central banks.  The size of the swap lines  increased from close to zero in mid-March to  almost $450 billion by the end of April. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repo facility for foreign and international  monetary authorities. The FOMC is committed to using its tools  to promote maximum employment and  price stability The ongoing public health crisis will weigh  heavily on economic activity, employment,  and inflation in the near term and pose  considerable risks to the economic outlook  over the medium term. The FOMC is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price-stability goals. The  Committee will continue to monitor the  implications of incoming information for the  economic outlook, including information  related to public health, as well as global  developments and muted inflation pressures,  and it will use its tools and act as appropriate  to support the economy. The Federal Reserve has continued  to review its strategic framework for  monetary policy In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad  review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to  pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of  maximum employment and price stability. A  key component of the review was a series of  public Fed Listens events. The Federal Reserve  held 14 events around the country in 2019 to  consult with a range of organizations on the  effects that labor market conditions, inflation,  and interest rates have on them and their  communities. In light of the rapidly changing  public health and economic environments due  to COVID-19, the Federal Reserve convened  another event in May 2020 to get an update.  The Federal Reserve has released a report on  its Fed Listens initiative. The lessons learned from the Fed Listens initiative were never more  important than they are today as Americans  navigate through these challenging times.  The Federal Reserve expects to complete  the review of its monetary policy strategy,  tools, and communication practices later this  year. The Federal Reserve remains focused  on the attainment of its goals of maximum  employment and price stability, including  laying the foundation for the return to a strong  labor market. Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open  Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held  on June 9–10, 2020, meeting participants  submitted their projections of the most likely  outcomes for real gross domestic product  (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and  inflation for each year from 2020 through 2022  and over the longer run. Each participant’s  projections were based on information  available at the time of the meeting, together  with his or her assessment of appropriate  monetary policy and assumptions about other  factors likely to affect economic outcomes.  The longer-run projections represent each  participant’s assessment of the value to which  each variable would be expected to converge,  over time, under appropriate monetary policy  and in the absence of further shocks to the  economy. “Appropriate monetary policy”  is defined as the future path of policy  that each participant deems most likely to  foster outcomes for economic activity  and inflation that best satisfy his or her  individual interpretation of the Federal  Reserve’s congressionally mandated goals of  promoting maximum employment and  price stability. All participants judged that the uncertainty  attending their projections was higher than  the average of the past 20 years. The median  of participants’ projections for real GDP  growth was negative 6.5 percent for 2020,  with individual projections ranging from  negative 10.0 to negative 4.2 percent. The median of projections for  real GDP growth was 5.0 percent for 2021 and  3.5 percent for 2022. The median assessment  of real GDP growth in the longer run was  1.8 percent, down 0.1 percentage point since  the December 2019 projections included in the  February 2020 Monetary Policy Report. The median of projections for the  unemployment rate in the fourth quarter  of 2020 was 9.3 percent, with individual  projections ranging from 7.0 to 14.0 percent.  The median of projections for the  unemployment rate was 6.5 percent and  5.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2021 and  2022, respectively. These values are above the  median assessment of the longer-run normal  unemployment rate, 4.1 percent, which was  unchanged from December. The median of projections for inflation, as  measured by changes in the price index for  personal consumption expenditures (PCE),  was 0.8 percent for 2020, 1.6 percent for  2021, and 1.7 percent for 2022. Almost all  participants expected inflation to run below  the Committee’s longer-run objective of  2 percent through 2022. The medians of  projections for core PCE inflation were  1.0 percent for this year, 1.5 percent for 2021,  and 1.7 percent for 2022. With regard to participants’ projections  of appropriate monetary policy, almost  all participants expected to maintain the  target range for the federal funds rate at  0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of  2022. These projections represent  participants’ individual assessments of  appropriate policy consistent with their  projections of economic growth, employment,  inflation, and other factors. However, the  economic outlook is inherently uncertain; thus,  each participant’s assessment of appropriate  policy is also necessarily uncertain and will  change in response to changes to the economic  outlook and associated risks. The median  estimate of the longer-run level for the federal  funds rate, 2.5 percent, was unchanged from  December. A more complete description of the Summary of  Economic Projections will be released with the  minutes of the June 9–10, 2020, FOMC meeting  on July 1. Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic For nearly all industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations, employment was substantially  lower in May than in February. While job loss has been  pervasive, some groups have experienced more severe  employment declines than others, particularly workers  with lower earnings and the socioeconomic groups that  are disproportionately represented among low-wage  jobs; employment declines have also been larger in  some states than in others. Although disparities in labor  market outcomes across groups often widen during  recessions, certain factors unique to this episode—in  particular, the social-distancing measures taken by  households, businesses, and governments to limit  in-person interactions—have contributed to the recent  divergence. Because jobs differ in the degree to which they  involve personal contact and physical proximity, in  whether they provide an “essential function,” and in  whether their business operations can be conducted  remotely, social-distancing measures have had  disparate consequences across industries and, in  turn, on particular types of workers who tend to work  in heavily affected industries. For example, the net  proportion of jobs lost since February has been greater  in industries such as accommodation and food services  (where social-distancing regulations have severely  affected many businesses and where workers are  frequently unable to work from home) and smaller in  industries such as professional and business services  and financial activities (where workers may be less  affected by social distancing and are generally more  able to conduct work from home).  In keeping with this  pattern, states that rely heavily on tourism—such as  Hawaii and Nevada—saw exceptionally large increases  in unemployment through April (the most recent month  for which state unemployment rate data are available). Net job loss since February thus far has been  concentrated in lower-wage industries, suggesting that  employment declines have been disproportionately large among lower-paid workers who may be less  able to financially weather an extended period of  unemployment. Indeed, estimates of employment  declines based on a worker’s previous wage (using data  from the payroll provider ADP), shown in figure A, also  indicate this disproportionate pattern of job loss. From  February to mid-April, employment fell substantially  more for workers who were previously earning wages  in the bottom fourth of wage earners, compared with  other workers. Despite somewhat more rapid job  growth for lower-wage earners in subsequent weeks,  employment for lower-wage earners remains roughly  35 percent lower than in February, compared with  5 to 15 percent lower employment for higher-wage  earners. These differences are also consistent with  results from a recent survey conducted by the Federal  Reserve Board that indicated that among households  with an annual income of $40,000 or less, nearly  40 percent of individuals who were employed in  February experienced job loss in March or early April,  compared with 20 percent of the population overall. Figure B illustrates that the decline in employment  (as a fraction of the population) has also been especially  large for people aged 16 to 24 compared with older  workers, for people without a bachelor’s degree  compared with those with at least a bachelor’s degree,  and for Hispanics compared with other races and  ethnicities. In addition, employment rates have dropped  somewhat more for women than for men, and for  Asians and African Americans compared with whites. In  general, the groups with the larger employment declines  are most commonly employed in the industries that have  experienced the greatest net employment declines thus  far, such as accommodation, food service, and retail  trade; these demographic groups are also less likely to  report being able to work from home. In the months ahead, labor market prospects for the  unemployed and underemployed—both overall and  for particularly hard-hit groups of workers—will largely  depend on the course of the COVID-19 outbreak  itself and on actions taken to halt its spread. Recent  job losses differ from those of previous recessions  not only in the suddenness and severity with which  they occurred, but also in the unusually high share of workers who expect them to be temporary. Research has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer financial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations. Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19 In response to the immense health and economic  consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal  lawmakers have enacted a variety of measures. These  measures are expected to raise government outlays and  reduce tax revenues—the sum of which we refer to as  fiscal support—by nearly $2½ trillion over 10 years, of  which about $2 trillion is expected in the current fiscal  year, according to the Congressional Budget Office  (CBO). The legislation also included  $454 billion for the Department of the Treasury to fund  lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve  and $46 billion to provide loans to the airline industry.1 Consistent with the historically large economic  consequences resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic,  the amount of fiscal support that has been enacted  constitutes the fastest and largest fiscal response to any  postwar economic downturn. Figure B breaks down the estimated fiscal support  for fiscal year 2020 into four broad  categories: (1) direct aid to households, (2) loans or  grants to small businesses, (3) other aid to businesses,  and (4) government purchases of goods and services or  grants to state and local governments. The rest of this discussion provides a brief overview  of the main components of the four stimulus bills,  focusing on the CBO’s estimate of fi scal support  (increased outlays minus reduced tax revenues) for  fi scal 2020, organized by the four categories assigned  in the fi gure. Direct Aid to Households: $740 billion The largest component of income support is roughly  $290 billion in one-time payments to households.  These stimulus checks provide households with a  one-time refundable tax credit of $1,200 per adult  and $500 per child 16 and under, with a phaseout  at incomes between $75,000 and $100,000 for  individuals and between $150,000 and $200,000  for couples. By the end of May, according to the Treasury Department, nearly all of the stimulus checks  had been disbursed. The second major piece of  household income support is $230 billion in expanded  unemployment insurance (UI) benefi ts. UI benefi ts  were increased by $600 per week through the end of  July; eligibility was expanded through December for  “gig” workers, the self-employed, and those who are  unable to work as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak;  and benefit durations were extended by 13 weeks  through December. According to the CBO, around  $70 billion in the more generous weekly benefi ts had  been paid through the end of May. The legislation also  provides student loan and mortgage relief, suspending  loan payments and interest accrual on federal student  loans until the end of September and reducing or  suspending mortgage payments for mortgages backed  by government-sponsored enterprises.  Another  component of the legislation provides federally  mandated paid sick leave for workers at employers with fewer than 500 employees. The cost of the sick leave  is rebated to employers through refundable payroll tax  credits, which are expected to total about $90 billion in  fi scal 2020. Employees are entitled to up to two weeks  of paid leave equal to normal earnings for employees or  family members who are directly affected by COVID-19  or COVID-19-related closures; additionally, employees  are entitled to 10 weeks of paid leave at two-thirds  normal pay for those caring for a child whose school  or daycare is closed. In addition, about $90 billion in  tax relief was provided to households in fiscal 2020,  primarily through expanding the deductibility of certain  business losses from individual tax liabilities. Loans and Grants to Small Businesses:  $760 billion The Paycheck Protection Program provides about  $670 billion in support to businesses with fewer than  500 employees through loans of up to 250 percent  of monthly payroll costs before the crisis (subject to  a cap of $10 million). These loans will be forgiven if  employment and compensation are maintained relative  to a pre-crisis level. In addition, small businesses are  supported by about $90 billion in Small Business  Administration (SBA) Economic Injury Disaster Loans and by six-month loan payment deferrals for new and  existing SBA borrowers. Other Aid to Businesses: $420 billion Businesses are aided by several provisions that  reduce tax revenues in fiscal 2020, with the largest  reduction coming from delayed payment of employer side payroll taxes until 2021 and 2022, which is  expected to reduce tax payments by $210 billion in  fiscal 2020 but mostly be made up in subsequent  years. An additional roughly $90 billion reduction  in fi scal 2020 tax liability results from modifi cations  of the treatment of net operating losses and interest  expenses for corporations. The legislation also provides  nearly $50 billion in payroll tax relief for businesses  significantly affected by COVID-19 shutdowns in  order to retain employees. Aside from tax relief,  about $20 billion in loans and grants are expected  to go to passenger and cargo air carriers and related  contractors to support payroll expenses for aviation  workers affected by the pandemic. In addition, about  $50 billion in funds are expected to go to hospitals  to support health-care-related expenses or provide  relief for lost revenues. Finally, while they do not  show up in the CBO’s estimates of fiscal support, the  legislation provided up to $454 billion for the Treasury  Department to fund lending facilities established by  the Federal Reserve to offer loans to businesses as well  as state and local governments and provided up to  $46 billion to offer loans to the airline industry. Direct Government Purchases and Aid to  State and Local Governments: $260 billion The largest part of this aid category consists of  about $150 billion in relief funding to state and local  governments for expenses related to dealing with the  COVID-19 pandemic. State governments will also  receive an extra $30 billion through a temporary  increase in the share of Medicaid expenditures that  the federal government covers. In addition, the Federal  Emergency Management Agency is expected to spend  $50 billion in disaster relief funds to provide assistance  to individuals and organizations affected by the  COVID-19 crisis. Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis Small businesses employ nearly half of U.S. private sector workers, play key roles in local communities,  and provide income to millions of business owners.  The COVID-19 pandemic poses acute risks to the  survival of many small businesses. Widespread failure  of small businesses would create economic insecurity  for millions of workers and business owners, slow  down the economic recovery, and alter the economic  landscape of local communities. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies are making  aggressive efforts to support small businesses. More than 99 percent of U.S. fi rms have fewer than  500 employees, and almost 90 percent have fewer  than 20 employees. Altogether, businesses with fewer  than 500 employees account for almost half of private sector jobs.  Small businesses and small nonprofit  organizations are particularly prevalent in service  industries and include examples such as car dealers,  restaurants, barber shops, medical offices, legal offices,  home repair contractors, and religious organizations.  These businesses and organizations are part of the  economic and social landscape of local communities  and neighborhoods. Small businesses are also prevalent  in manufacturing supply chain industries.  Moreover,  the businesses that spur innovation, contribute to  nationwide job and productivity growth, and turn into  large household names typically start out as small  businesses. Small businesses are particularly vulnerable to social  distancing for two main reasons. First, small businesses  are prevalent in sectors that have seen especially large  declines in revenue due to social distancing; small  businesses make up about 60 percent of employment  in the “leisure and hospitality” sector and about  85 percent of employment in the “other services” sector  (which includes assorted neighborhood fixtures like  churches and beauty salons). Second, small fi rms tend  to be more financially constrained than larger fi rms.  For example, bank account data suggest that roughly  half of small businesses entered the COVID-19 crisis  with cash reserves sufficient for fewer than 15 days of  operations without revenue.  Moreover, even under  normal circumstances, many small fi rms face financial  challenges and lack access to liquid financial markets,  relying instead on bank loans, credit cards, and the  personal resources of owners. A wide variety of data reveal an alarming picture  of small business health during the COVID-19 crisis.  Surveys of small businesses suggest that pessimism  about business viability is prevalent.  The majority of  small businesses have seen revenue losses, and half of small businesses do not expect to return to their usual  level of operations within the next six months. Employment declines have been deeper among  small businesses than among larger businesses.  Moreover, the share of total job losses  accounted for by small businesses stopping paycheck  issuance entirely (that is, going inactive) is substantial.  Data from Homebase, a  provider of scheduling and time sheet services for small  local businesses, show that between 30 and 40 percent  of establishments in sectors deeply affected by social  distancing have gone inactive since February 15.9  Data  from Womply, a provider of credit card transaction  processing services, suggest that spending at small  restaurants was down 80 percent (versus a year earlier)  by early April and was still down 50 percent in early  June. Taken together, these data suggest considerable  risk of failure for a large number of small businesses. The inflow of new businesses (which are typically  small businesses) also plummeted, as shown in  figure B. The Census Bureau reports that, in late March,  applications for new employer business tax identifiers  were down more than 40 percent relative to a year earlier; the series has only gradually recovered and  was still just below last year’s pace as of late May.  Business entry is a key contributor to job creation; with  business exits and associated job destruction likely to  be elevated during the COVID-19 episode, new fi rm  creation is even more important than usual. The Congress, the Federal Reserve, and other federal  agencies have acted swiftly to help address the risk  of widespread small business failure. As part of the  CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic  Security Act), the Congress created the Paycheck  Protection Program (PPP) to provide small businesses  with funds to retain employees for roughly two months.  The Federal Reserve is bolstering the effectiveness  of the PPP through the Paycheck Protection Program  Liquidity Facility, which extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans. About  three-fourths of small businesses with employees have  applied for PPP assistance, suggesting the program  is extremely valuable and timely, and a large share  of these applications have been approved; however,  some industries may face an ongoing need after the  program expires. The Federal Reserve is also supporting lending  to small businesses through the Term Asset-Backed  Securities Loan Facility, which lends to holders of,  among others, securities backed by loans guaranteed  by the Small Business Administration. In addition, the  Federal Reserve has established the Main Street Lending  Program (MSLP), which features a range of facilities  designed to provide support to small and medium sized fi rms.13 Small businesses make vital contributions to labor  markets and their local communities, and a critical  subset of small businesses are young, innovative fi rms  with the potential to create many jobs and increase  overall productivity. The nature of the economic  recovery that follows the COVID-19 crisis will depend  in part on the survival of small businesses. Small  business failures not only destroy jobs, but also erase  the productive knowledge within the fi rms, deplete  the assets of business owners, alter the character of  communities and neighborhoods, and, in some cases,  deprive the country of innovations. The Federal Reserve  will continue to monitor the conditions of small  businesses and support this fundamental segment of  the economy. Developments Related to Financial Stability The COVID-19 pandemic has abruptly halted large  swaths of economic activity and led to swift financial  repercussions. Despite increased resilience from the  financial and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably those  associated with liquidity and maturity transformation  in the nonbank financial sector—have amplified some  of the economic effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected to be  significant in the near term. This discussion reviews  vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system at the  onset of the pandemic and describes some of the  extraordinary measures taken by the Federal Reserve to  mitigate the brunt of the shock. At the onset of the pandemic, asset valuation  pressures in the United States were elevated. Spreads,  risk premiums, and implied volatility were at the low  ends of their historical distributions among several  large asset categories, including domestic equities  and corporate bonds. Beginning in late February,  expectations for global economic growth plummeted  and uncertainty increased sharply, driving down  risky asset prices and putting downward pressure on  Treasury yields. Equity prices plunged as concern over  the COVID-19 outbreak grew and volatility surged to  extreme levels. Trading conditions became impaired  across several markets, posing significant challenges  to price discovery and increasing trading costs.  yields on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened to the highest levels since  the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Leveraged loan  spreads also widened, especially for lower-rated loans.  Since late March, however, investors’ tolerance for  risk increased somewhat following interventions by  the Federal Reserve; subsequently, risky asset prices  partially retraced their course and market functioning  improved. While the data on real estate prices mostly  predate the COVID-19 outbreak, commercial real  estate markets, in particular, had elevated valuation  pressures at the beginning of 2020, making them  vulnerable to significant price declines stemming from  the unfolding effects of the pandemic. On the eve of the pandemic, vulnerabilities  associated with total private-sector debt stood at  a moderate level relative to their historical norms.  However, this assessment masks differences across the  business and household sectors. Household borrowing  advanced more slowly than overall economic activity  and remained heavily concentrated among borrowers  with high credit scores. By contrast, business debt levels were high relative to either business assets  or gross domestic product, with the riskiest fi rms  accounting for most of the increase in debt in recent  years. Against this backdrop, the COVID-19 outbreak  poses severe risks to businesses and millions of  households. For businesses, as economic activity  continues to contract, the related reduction in earnings  and additional debt needed to bridge the downturn  will increase the debt burden and default risk. For  households, the sudden and outsized increase in  unemployment and sharp decline in family incomes  may give rise to widespread delinquencies and defaults. In the financial sector, banks, as of the fourth quarter  of 2019, were well capitalized relative to historical  levels, in part due to the regulatory reforms enacted  after the GFC. To date, banks have been able to meet  surging demand for draws on credit lines while also  building loan loss reserves to absorb higher expected  defaults. Leverage at broker-dealers changed little in  the second half of 2019 and remained at historically  low levels. However, in March, constraints on dealers’  intermediation capacity, including internal risk management practices and regulatory constraints on  the bank holding companies under which many dealers  operate, were cited as possible reasons for deteriorating  liquidity in even usually liquid markets. Leverage at  life insurance companies has reached post-2008 highs.  Moreover, the capitalization of the life insurance sector  is likely to deteriorate in coming quarters because  of lower-than-expected asset valuations and lower  long-term interest rates. Some measures suggest that  hedge fund leverage continued to expand through  the end of 2019. Higher leverage left hedge funds  vulnerable to asset price declines and to the increase in  market volatility accompanying the COVID-19 shock.  The subsequent deleveraging by hedge funds likely  contributed to market dislocations in February  and March. Funding markets proved less fragile than during  the 2007–09 episode in the face of the COVID-19  outbreak and the associated financial market turmoil.  The subdued reliance of large bank holding companies  on short-term funding and their robust holdings of high quality liquid assets have prevented any considerable  stress in the banking sector. Nonetheless, significant  strains emerged and emergency Federal Reserve  actions were required to stabilize short-term funding  markets. Recent growth in prime money market mutual  funds (MMFs) and large holdings of corporate debt by other mutual funds increased the vulnerabilities in  the financial system. These vulnerabilities produced  considerable strains in March as asset prices fell and  investors became more risk averse. Prime MMFs and  bond mutual funds experienced significant outflows  in March, leading to severe strains in markets funded  by these institutions—notably, commercial paper (CP)  and corporate bond markets. The tensions began to  ease only after the Federal Reserve took several actions  targeted at these markets, as will be discussed. The outlook for the pandemic and economic activity  is uncertain. In the near term, risks associated with  the course of COVID-19 and its effects on the U.S.  and global economies remain high. In addition, there  is potential for stresses to interact with preexisting  vulnerabilities stemming from financial system or fiscal  weaknesses in Europe, China, and emerging market  economies. In turn, these risks have the potential  to interact with the vulnerabilities identified in this  discussion and produce additional strains for the U.S.  financial system. Facilities to Support the Economy since the  COVID-19 Outbreak The Federal Reserve, with the approval of the  Secretary of the Treasury, established new credit and  liquidity facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal  Reserve Act to alleviate severe dislocations that arose in  a number of financial markets and to support the flow  of credit to households and businesses.  These actions  fall into two categories: stabilizing short-term funding  markets and providing more direct support for the  extension of credit across the economy. As investors moved rapidly toward cash and the  most liquid assets, an acute liquidity squeeze emerged  in short-term funding markets in mid-March. In the  CP market, funding dried up even for companies in  good financial standing. At the same time, investors  contributed to the stress by starting to pull away from  some prime MMFs, which typically hold CP and other  highly liquid, short-term debt instruments. In response,  the Federal Reserve set up the Commercial Paper  Funding Facility, for which the Treasury Department has  provided $10 billion of credit protection. In addition, the Federal Reserve established the Money Market  Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), for which the  Treasury Department will provide up to $10 billion of  credit protection. The Federal Reserve established a  companion facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility,  to provide loans against high-quality collateral to  primary dealers that are critical intermediaries in short term funding markets. The announcement of these  facilities strongly affected the targeted markets. After  an initial wave of borrowing from the facilities, market  strains eased and the use of these facilities has abated. To provide more direct support for credit across  the economy, the Federal Reserve established a  number of facilities in March and April. The Treasury’s  equity investments in many of these facilities were  authorized by the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief,  and Economic Security Act). Together, these facilities  will support the fl ow of up to $2.6 trillion of credit to  large employers, small and medium-sized businesses,  households, and state and local governments. The  Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF)  and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility  (SMCCF) were established to support employment  and spending of large, investment-grade businesses.  Following the announcement of the PMCCF and the  SMCCF, spreads of both investment- and speculative grade corporate bonds declined notably, and issuance  of investment-grade corporate bonds strengthened. To  support the longer-term, market-based financing that is  critical to real economic activity, the Federal Reserve  reestablished the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan  Facility to purchase securities backed by auto loans,  equipment leases, credit card loans, and other lending.  The Municipal Liquidity Facility was set up to help  U.S. state and local governments manage cash flow  pressures by providing credit secured through their  short-term obligations. The Federal Reserve established  the Main Street Lending Program to provide up to  $600 billion in four-year loans for small and medium sized businesses that were in good financial standing  before the pandemic. Finally, the Paycheck Protection  Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) was established to  bolster the effectiveness of the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) of the Small Business Administration.  The CARES Act created the PPP program to provide  loans that can help small businesses keep their workers  on payrolls. The PPPLF extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans, taking the  loans as collateral. The Federal Reserve is deeply committed to  transparency and recognizes that the need for  transparency is heightened when it is called upon  to use its emergency powers. Transparency helps  promote the accountability of the Federal Reserve to  the Congress and the public. Specifically, the Board  of Governors will report substantial amounts of  information on a monthly basis for the liquidity and  lending facilities using CARES Act funding as well  as for the PPPLF, including the names and details of  participants in each facility; amounts borrowed and  interest rate charged; and overall costs, revenues, and  fees for each facility. For the few programs that are  targeting financial mark et functioning, the Federal  Reserve will provide a full accounting of transactions  in these facilities. Real-time disclosure would risk  stigmatizing participation in these facilities and  undermining the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide  assurance that these systemically important markets  will continue their critical function in times of severe  market stress. The delay in disclosure will be no longer  than necessary to ensure that participants do not  hesitate to participate. While the facilities are operating,  the Federal Reserve will disclose extensive and regular  aggregate information on total borrowing, collateral  and fees, and interest income. Tools to Lessen Strains in Dollar  Funding Markets The Federal Reserve has taken actions to help  maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and  businesses by reducing financial stresses abroad, which  can spill over into U.S. credit markets. The Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity swap lines improve liquidity  conditions in dollar funding markets in the United  States and abroad by providing foreign central banks  with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to  institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market  stress. These swap lines provide U.S. dollars to a foreign  central bank in exchange for the equivalent amount  of funds in that central bank’s currency based on the  market exchange rate at the time of the transaction. The  Federal Reserve and each participating foreign central  bank agree to swap back the same quantities of their  two currencies at a specified date in the future. During  the week of March 15, 2020, the network of swap lines  was expanded and enhanced by adding additional  central bank counterparties, lowering the price on the  lines, and increasing the frequency and maturity of  dollar operations. In addition to the swap line enhancements, on  March 31, the Federal Reserve announced a new  program to support dollar funding markets, the  temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary  Authorities) Repo Facility. This facility should help  support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury  market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars  to a broad range of countries, many of which do not  have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve.  Under this facility, FIMA account holders can enter  into overnight repurchase agreements (repos) with the  Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S. Treasury  securities they hold at the Federal Reserve for U.S.  dollars. The repos are overnight but can be rolled over  as needed. The facility reduces the need for central  banks to sell their Treasury securities outright, thus helping to avoid disruptions to the Treasury market and  upward pressure on yields. Since its inception, take-up  at the facility has been modest. Regulatory and Supervisory Actions to  Support the Economy since the COVID-19  Outbreak The Federal Reserve has also made several  adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory regime  to facilitate market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected by  COVID-19. These actions fall into the following four  categories: 1. acceleration of previously planned, permanent  adjustments to certain regulatory requirements  to address specific impediments to market  functioning 2. provision of additional time for banking  organizations to phase in new regulatory  requirements 3. temporary relaxation of certain regulatory  requirements or requirements imposing  supervisory burden 4. supervisory statements encouraging banks to  support those affected by COVID-19  The fi rst category includes changing the definition  of eligible retained income to ensure capital and total  loss-absorbing capacity buffers function as intended;  allowing early adoption of a new method for certain  banking organizations to measure counterparty credit risk derivatives contracts; reducing reserve requirement  ratios to zero; and amending Regulation D (Reserve  Requirements of Depository Institutions) to delete the  six-per-month limit on convenience transfers from  the “savings deposit” defi nition. The second category  includes allowing certain banking organizations  additional time to delay the effects of the Current  Expected Credit Losses accounting standard in their  regulatory capital and extending the initial compliance  with the Single-Counterparty Credit Limit rule by  18 months. The third category includes excluding  Treasury securities and reserves from the supplementary  leverage ratio denominator; modifying the liquidity  and capital rules to allow banking organizations to  neutralize the regulatory effects of participating in the  PPPLF and MMLF programs; introducing a change to  support the favorable treatment of term primary credit  loans from the discount window under the liquidity  rules; providing temporary waivers to banks for limits  on transactions with nonbank affiliates that offer  credit and intermediation; temporarily lowering the  community bank leverage ratio to 8 percent; giving  banks flexibility in the timing of regulatory reports; and  granting mortgage servicers flexibility to work with  struggling consumers affected by COVID-19. Finally,  the fourth category includes encouraging banks to use  their capital and liquidity buffers to work constructively  with borrowers and to make short-term loan  modifications on a good faith basis, as well as  encouraging lenders to offer responsible small-dollar  loans to consumers and small businesses and to support  low- and moderate-income borrowers through loans  and banking fee waivers. Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Economies Authorities in foreign economies have announced a  wide array of fiscal, monetary, and regulatory measures  to mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Many foreign governments have enacted sizable  fiscal packages to address the sudden loss of income by  fi rms and households, with a special focus on the most  vulnerable groups, such as low-income individuals, the  unemployed, and small and medium-sized enterprises.  The size of the support is, on average, considerably  larger in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) than in  emerging market economies (EMEs), as many EME  governments have more limited fiscal space. The measures targeted at fi rms aim to keep them  afl oat in the near term, with the hope of preserving  businesses until demand returns. Such measures  include loans at favorable terms and loan guarantees;  deferrals of taxes and social security contributions;  tax breaks and cash transfers, especially for small  and medium-sized enterprises; and targeted  sectoral support. For households, the measures aim  to provide income to those in need and alleviate  payment difficulties. These policies include increased  unemployment and pension payments, mortgage  deferrals, accelerated transfer payments, and direct  cash payments. In addition, several AFEs and some  Asian emerging economies have adopted large direct  wage subsidies to keep workers on fi rms’ payrolls.  Such measures may help limit dislocations in the labor  markets of these countries by subsidizing a significant  reduction in hours worked. The hope of these programs  is that workers’ continued attachment to their fi rms will  preserve human capital and make it readily available to  the fi rms during the recovery that follows the crisis. Many central banks have reduced their policy  rates—often to or near their effective lower  bounds—and have taken substantial actions to start  or expand asset purchases and to support the flow of  credit. Although central banks acted quickly to lower  interest rates, some policymakers in the EMEs expressed  concerns about intensifying capital outflows, while a few AFE central banks worried about the potential harm  to banks’ financial health. Several AFE central banks have purchased  government debt in response to the crisis. These  purchases have been primarily aimed at restoring  market functioning and providing liquidity, but the  purchases have also eased financial conditions by  lowering long-term yields. The Bank of England  (BOE) restarted its purchases of gilts, and the Swedish  Riks bank increased the pace of its existing program.  The European Central Bank (ECB) and the Reserve  Bank of New Zealand introduced and expanded asset  purchase programs. The Reserve Bank of Australia  (RBA) began bond purchases to target the three-year government bond yield at 0.25 percent, the same as its  overnight rate. Some central banks, such as the Bank  of Canada (BOC) and the RBA, have started purchases  of provincial and state bonds to support liquidity in  those markets. To ensure the smooth transmission of  its monetary actions, the ECB has used its flexibility  to weight its purchases more heavily toward bonds of  euro-area member states that face higher yields. Monetary authorities have also adopted policies  to sustain the provision of credit to businesses and  households during the pandemic. Central banks have  purchased a variety of private assets, thus directly  addressing distress in funding markets and helping  ease financial conditions for fi rms. These assets include  corporate bonds purchased by the BOE, ECB, and Bank  of Japan (BOJ); commercial paper bought by the BOC,  BOE, BOJ, and Riks bank; and exchange-traded funds  and real estate investment trusts purchased by the BOJ.  These actions have significantly expanded the balance  sheets of major foreign central banks. Some  central banks in EMEs have also begun purchasing  private assets, with the central banks of Chile and  Colombia buying bank bonds. Several central banks have also activated funding for-lending facilities to provide relatively inexpensive  funding to banks as long as they maintain defined  lending benchmarks, in some cases with extra  incentives to lend to small and medium-sized  enterprises. The BOE, BOJ, ECB, RBA, Riks bank, and  Bank of Korea currently have such programs. Regulators in a number of foreign economies  have introduced various measures that provide relief  for banks to help sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to lend to  the economy. These measures include temporarily  easing capital requirements, such as the reduction— and, in some cases, elimination—of conservation  and countercyclical capital buffers; deferring  the implementation of new, stricter Basel capital  requirements; temporarily easing liquidity requirements (for example, in France, Germany, and the United  Kingdom); and giving banks and their supervisors  more flexibility in dealing with nonperforming loans  (for example, the ECB). In addition, some regulators  have temporarily excluded central bank reserves and  certain safe assets from the calculation of leverage  exposures. Some foreign regulators are considering the  reduction or even elimination of risk weights on new  loans guaranteed by the government. Regulators also  emphasize that banks should continue to apply sound  underwriting standards and conduct solid capital and  liquidity planning and robust risk management. Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets Deterioration in Market Functioning in  February and March Between late February and early March, functioning  in U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage backed securities (MBS) markets became increasingly  strained. Amid growing concerns about the economic  implications of COVID-19, investors sought to sell large  volumes of long-maturity Treasury securities and MBS  and reallocate their portfolios into shorter-term, more  liquid assets. While the yields on long-maturity Treasury  securities initially dropped sharply, in mid-March they  started to increase in the face of these strong selling  pressures. Around the same time as the  increase in long-maturity Treasury yields, the spreads  between yields on MBS and Treasury securities of  comparable duration widened sharply. Indications of  severe dislocations in both markets were also present.  For example, bid-ask spreads for Treasury securities  and agency MBS widened significantly. One factor that may explain these market  dislocations is the effect of widespread selling of  Treasury securities and MBS to primary dealers, who  intermediate a large proportion of trading in these  markets. As a wide range of domestic and foreign  investors (including foreign official investors) rushed  to raise cash or rebalance their portfolios by selling  assets, dealers took large amounts of less liquid securities, including off-the-run Treasury securities  and agency MBS, onto their balance sheets. At  the same time, mortgage refinancing picked up,  prompting substantial turnover in the MBS market.  By early March, some dealers had reportedly run  into balance sheet constraints that hampered their  ability to purchase additional securities, leading to a  deterioration in the functioning of a number of dealer intermediated markets. In the market for Treasury securities, liquidity  conditions were particularly poor for more seasoned, or  “off the run,” securities. However, the most liquid parts  of the market, where newly issued, or “on the run,”  securities are traded electronically, saw unprecedented  strains: The volume of posted quotes, or “market  depth,” dropped sharply, while intraday bid-ask spreads  were exceptionally volatile, particularly for the longest maturity securities. These strains in the most liquid part  of the market suggest that principal trading fi rms— market participants who specialize in high-frequency  and automated intermediation—were significantly less  active than usual. Federal Reserve Policy Actions The disruptions to the functioning of the Treasury  and MBS markets were notable in view of the status of these markets as cornerstones for the operation  of the U.S. and global financial systems and for the  transmission of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve  therefore took a series of policy measures designed  to ensure the smooth functioning of these markets.  These measures included the expansion of repurchase  operations, an increase in purchases of Treasury and  agency MBS securities, the expansion of financing  arrangements for primary dealers, and a temporary  change to the regulatory capital requirements of bank  holding companies and depository institutions. Beginning March 9, 2020, following a directive  from the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the  Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Open Market Desk  increased the size of overnight and term repurchase  operations in order to ensure that the supply of reserves  remained ample and to support the smooth functioning  of the markets in which primary dealers obtain a  substantial proportion of their short-term funding. These changes expanded the supply of short-term  funding available to primary dealers to fi nance their  increased holdings of Treasury securities and agency  MBS at a time when funding costs from other sources  were increasing. Further, on March 12, the Desk  introduced new weekly recurring one- and three-month  term repurchase agreement (repo) operations of up  to $500 billion to address the disruption in Treasury  financing markets.  Finally, on March 16, the Desk  introduced a second daily overnight repo operation and  increased the amount offered in each to $500 billion. Usage of Federal Reserve repo operations peaked on  March 17, with overnight and term repo outstanding  of $496 billion, and has since fallen to $167 billion  as funding strains have eased. In light of more stable  repo market conditions, on May 4, the Desk returned  to once daily overnight repo operations. Further, on May 14, the Desk discontinued its three-month term  repo operations. Despite the much larger volume of repo operations  during the week of March 9, strains in Treasury and  agency MBS markets continued to build. Beginning in  mid-March, therefore, the FOMC directed the Desk to  purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS in order  to support smooth market functioning. On March 15,  the FOMC directed the Desk to increase its holdings  of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and of  agency MBS by at least $200 billion, with purchases  to take place across maturities.  To provide greater  flexibility in addressing the strains, on March 23,  the FOMC authorized purchases of these securities  in the amounts needed to support smooth market  functioning and effective transmission of monetary  policy to broader financial conditions. The securities  targeted for purchase were also expanded to include  agency commercial MBS. Since mid-March, the  Desk has purchased approximately $1.6 trillion and  $719 billion of Treasury securities and agency MBS,  respectively.  The daily amounts of purchases peaked at  approximately $75 billion and $41 billion for Treasury  securities and agency MBS, respectively, in late March  before being reduced in stages to the current average  daily amounts of around $4.0 billion for Treasury  securities and $4.5 billion for agency MBS (including  reinvestments). These purchases helped reduce  financial market volatility by providing a predictable  source of demand for these securities and by taking up  some of the inventories from dealers’ balance sheets. On March 17, the Board, with the approval of the  U.S. Treasury Secretary, established the Primary Dealer  Credit Facility (PDCF) to provide primary dealers  with access to term funding against a broad range of  collateral.  The PDCF helped alleviate funding pressures  faced by primary dealers by allowing them to source  financing more easily for their increased securities  holdings. The amount of PDCF loans outstanding  peaked at around $35 billion in mid-April but has since  declined to around $6 billion. On March 31, the Federal Reserve announced the  establishment of the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility to  allow FIMA account holders, which consist of central  banks and other international monetary authorities  with accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New  York, to exchange their Treasury securities for U.S.  dollars.  This facility allows foreign official institutions  to raise U.S. dollars, if needed, without having to sell  Treasury securities in the open market during periods  of heightened volatility or impaired market functioning.  Since its inception, take-up of the facility has been  modest, as stresses in the U.S. Treasury market have  declined. On April 1, the Federal Reserve released an interim  fi nal rule indicating that holdings of U.S. Treasury  securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks by  bank holding companies would be excluded from the  calculation of the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR)  until March 31, 2021.10 Further, on May 15, 2020,  the federal bank regulatory agencies (the Board of  Governors, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,  and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) released  an interim final rule allowing depository institutions  that are subject to the SLR the option to similarly  exclude U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal  Reserve Banks from their SLR calculations through  March 31, 2021.11 These temporary exemptions are  expected to ease liquidity pressures for primary dealers  and depository institutions subject to these leverage  ratios by providing them with greater flexibility to  intermediate trades with clients in the presence of  temporarily larger inventories of Treasury securities. Improvements in Market Functioning Since the announcement of these policy actions,  trading conditions in the markets for Treasury securities  and MBS have improved steadily. The purchases of  Treasury securities and agency MBS contributed to  the subsequent decline in primary dealers’ inventories  (fi gure C). Bid-ask spreads have narrowed, particularly  in the case of on-the-run Treasury securities, while MBS  spreads have also come down from their peaks in mid-March. In addition to the Federal Reserve’s actions, the  passage of the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Re lief, and  Economic Security Act), together with an improvement  in sentiment among investors regarding the economic  implications of COVID-19, likely contributed to the  improvement in market functioning. In late May, these  inventories temporarily increased to levels previously  seen in March, largely because of increased dealer  holdings of Treasury bills. However, Treasury markets  did not exhibit a recurrence of the notable strains in  trading conditions witnessed earlier this year. Although trading conditions have improved  substantially since mid-March, bid-ask spreads for  longer-maturity and off-the-run Treasury securities  remain wider than in mid-February. Market depth  for on-the-run securities remains low, particularly for  longer-maturity securities. MBS market functioning and  liquidity have largely returned to pre-February norms,  though strains remain in some less liquid parts of  the market. Developments on the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet The Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance  Sheet Has Increased Considerably In response to the financial and economic  disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the  Federal Reserve has eased the stance of monetary  policy and has deployed various tools to promote  smooth functioning of financial markets and the flow  of credit to households and businesses. This discussion  reviews the implications of these actions for the Federal  Reserve’s balance sheet. To support the smooth functioning of those  credit markets that are critical for the economy, the  Federal Reserve purchased Treasury securities and  agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed  securities (MBS), expanded repurchase agreement  (repo) operations, and introduced several credit and  liquidity facilities. As a result of these actions, the size  of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from  $4.2 trillion at the beginning of 2020, approximately  19 percent of U.S. nominal gross domestic product  (GDP), to $7.2 trillion in June 2020, approximately  33 percent of U.S. nominal GDP.  The $3 trillion increase  in the size of the balance sheet was driven by asset  purchases and other extraordinary actions. Open Market Operations, the Discount  Window, and U.S. Dollar Liquidity Swap Lines Since the beginning of 2020, System Open Market  Account holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS increased by $1,805 billion and $427 billion,  respectively.  The markets for both Treasury securities  and agency MBS play a critical role in the U.S.  economy, and the Federal Reserve’s purchases have  fostered a substantial improvement in the functioning of  these markets and the conditions prevailing in them. Furthermore, to address strains in short-term U.S.  dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York’s Open Market Desk expanded its offerings  of overnight and term repo operations. The amount  of repos outstanding reached a peak of $442 billion  in mid-March. Subsequently, given the improvement  in funding market conditions, the Desk announced  several reductions in the frequency of repo operations.  As of June 3, all repos outstanding had declined to  $212 billion, lower than the amount outstanding early  in the year, amid substantial increases in reserves and  improved funding market conditions. On March 15, the Federal Reserve announced  changes to the discount window and encouraged  depository institutions to use the discount window to  meet unexpected funding needs and support the fl ow  of credit to households and businesses.5  The changes  include lowering the primary credit rate by 150 basis  points to 0.25 percent and extending borrowing terms  for up to 90 days. The total outstanding discount  window primary credit borrowing peaked at around  $51 billion in late March and has since declined  to $11 billion in June. Furthermore, the Federal  Reserve maintains standing dollar liquidity swap line  agreements with the central banks of several countries  and instituted temporary agreements with the central  banks of additional countries. After initially ramping up  to $439 billion in March and April, the total agreements  outstanding stayed mostly flat in May to reach  $447 billion as of June 3. Lending Programs and Liquidity Facilities  under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act In addition to the open market operations and  initiatives described earlier, the Federal Reserve further  expanded measures to enhance liquidity and the fl ow  of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Under the  authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act,  with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the  Federal Reserve Board implemented various measures  in response to intensified stresses in several markets. The combined size of the Money Market Mutual  Fund Liquidity Facility and the Primary Dealer Credit  Facility increased to $86 billion in April, but the size  of the facilities declined to $36 billion by June 3. The  combined size of other facilities, such as the Paycheck  Protection Program Lending Facility, the Commercial  Paper Funding Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate  Credit Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility,  has been steadily rising and reached $65 billion as of  June 3. The Expansion of Total Assets Led to Higher  Reserve Balances Held by Depository  Institutions The increase in the Federal Reserve’s assets led to  a commensurate increase in the size of liabilities on  the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The expansion  of total assets from the outright purchases and other actions resulted in reserve balances of $3.3 trillion, an  increase of $1.7 trillion from the beginning of the year.  Additionally, several nonreserve liabilities increased.  In March and April, Federal Reserve notes grew faster  than normal, partially in response to the COVID-19  pandemic, and reached $1.9 trillion, an increase of  $144 billion from the beginning of the year. Furthermore, the U.S. Treasury’s General Account  (TGA) at the Federal Reserve, which the Treasury uses  to receive taxes and proceeds of Treasury auctions  and to process the government’s outlays, increased  substantially. At the beginning of 2020, the TGA  balance was approximately $400 billion. In preparation  for the fiscal spending related to the CARES Act  (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act)  and other stimulus measures, the TGA balance reached  a high of $1.4 trillion on June 3. Summary The COVID-19 outbreak is causing  tremendous human and economic hardship  across the United States and around the world.  The virus and the measures taken to protect  public health have induced a sharp decline in  economic activity and a surge in job losses,  with the unemployment rate, which had been  at a 50-year low, soaring to a postwar record  high. Weaker demand and significantly lower  oil prices are holding down consumer price  inflation. The disruptions to economic activity  here and abroad significantly affected financial  conditions and impaired the flow of credit to  U.S. households and businesses. In response  to these developments, the Federal Reserve  quickly lowered its policy rate to close to  zero to support economic activity and took  extraordinary measures to stabilize markets  and bolster the flow of credit to households,  businesses, and communities. Financial  conditions have improved, in part reflecting  policy measures to support the economy and  the flow of credit. The Federal Reserve is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price-stability goals. Economic and Financial  Developments Economic activity. In response to the public  health emergency precipitated by the spread  of COVID-19, many protective measures were  adopted to limit the transmission of the virus.  These social-distancing measures effectively  closed parts of the economy, resulting in a  sudden and unprecedented fall in economic  activity and historic increases in joblessness.  Although virus mitigation efforts in many  places did not begin until the final two weeks of  March, real personal consumption expenditures  (PCE) plummeted 6.7 percent in March and an  unprecedented 13.2 percent in April. Indicators  suggest spending rose in May, but the April  data and May indicators taken together point  to a collapse in second-quarter real PCE.  Likewise, in the housing market, residential  sales and construction in April posted outsized  declines that are close to some of the largest  ever recorded, and heightened uncertainty  and weak demand have led many businesses  to put investment plans on hold or cancel  them outright. These data, along with other  information, suggest that real gross domestic  product will contract at a rapid pace in the  second quarter after tumbling at an annual rate  of 5 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The labor market. The severe economic  repercussions of the pandemic have been  especially visible in the labor market. Since  February, employers have shed nearly  20 million jobs from payrolls, reversing almost  10 years of job gains. The unemployment rate  jumped from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent  in February to a post–World War II high  of 14.7 percent in April and then moved  down to a still very elevated 13.3 percent  in May. The most severe job losses have  been sustained by those with lower earnings  and by the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among low wage jobs. Inflation. Consumer price inflation has slowed  abruptly. The 12-month change in the price  index for PCE was just 0.5 percent in April.  The 12-month measure of PCE inflation that  excludes food and energy items (so-called  core inflation), which historically has been  a better indicator of where overall inflation  will be in the future than the total figure, fell  from 1.8 percent in February to 1.0 percent in  April. This slowing reflected monthly readings  for March and April that were especially  low because of large price declines in some  categories most directly affected by social  distancing. Overall inflation also has been held  down by substantially lower energy prices,  which more than offset the effects of surging  prices for food. Despite the sharp slowing in inflation, survey-based measures of longer run inflation expectations have generally been  stable at relatively low levels. However, market-based measures of inflation compensation have  moved down to some of the lowest readings  ever seen. Financial conditions. In late February and  over much of March as COVID-19 spread,  equity prices plunged and nominal Treasury  yields dropped substantially, with yields  on longer-term securities reaching all-time  record lows. Spreads of yields on corporate  bonds over those on comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened significantly as  the credit quality of firms declined and market  functioning deteriorated; in addition, loans  were unavailable for most firms, particularly  firms below investment grade. At the most  acute phase of this period, trading conditions  became extremely illiquid and some critical  markets stopped functioning properly.  Consumer borrowing also fell as spending  slumped. Several markets supporting consumer  lending experienced severe strains around  this period, including the agency residential  mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market  as well as the auto, credit card, and student  loan securitization markets. In response, the  Federal Reserve took unprecedented measures  to restore smooth market functioning and to  support the flow of credit in the economy,  including the creation of a number of  emergency credit and liquidity facilities.  These actions, along with the aggressive response  of fiscal policy, stabilized financial markets  and led to a notable improvement in financial  conditions for both firms and households as  well as state and local governments. Even so,  lending standards for both households and  businesses have become less accommodative,  and borrowing conditions are tight for low rated households and businesses. 1 A list of funding, credit, liquidity, and loan facilities  established by the Federal Reserve in response to  COVID-19 is available on the Board’s website at https:// www.federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-andloan-facilities.htm. Financial stability. The COVID-19 pandemic  has abruptly halted large swaths of economic  activity and led to swift financial repercussions.  Despite increased resilience from the financial  and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably  those associated with liquidity and maturity  transformation in the nonbank financial  sector—have amplified some of the economic  effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected  to be significant in the near term. The strains  on household and business balance sheets  from the economic and financial shocks since  March will likely create persistent fragilities.  Financial institutions may experience strains  as a result. The Federal Reserve, with approval  of the Secretary of the Treasury, established  new credit and liquidity facilities under  section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to  alleviate severe dislocations that arose in a  number of financial markets and to support  the flow of credit to households, businesses,  and state and local governments. Furthermore,  as financial stresses abroad risked spilling  over into U.S. credit markets, the Federal  Reserve and several other central banks  announced the expansion and enhancement  of dollar liquidity swap lines. In addition, the  Federal Reserve introduced a new temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  monetary authorities. The Federal Reserve  has also made a number of adjustments to its  regulatory and supervisory regime to facilitate  market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected  by COVID-19.  International developments. The spread of  COVID-19 throughout the world and the  measures taken to contain it have produced  devastating effects on the global economy.  Amid widespread and stringent shutdowns,  recent data suggest that global economic  activity in the first half of the year has  experienced a sharp and synchronized  contraction greater than that in the Global  Financial Crisis. The many mandated closures of nonessential businesses abroad and the  collapse in consumer demand contributed to  a significant deterioration in labor markets  and subdued inflation. Unlike past recessions,  services activity in the foreign economies has  dropped more sharply than manufacturing,  with restrictions on movement having  severely curtailed spending on travel, tourism,  restaurants, and recreation. Against this  backdrop, foreign governments and central  banks have responded strongly and swiftly  to support incomes and to improve market  liquidity and the provision of credit. More  recently, economic activity has begun to revive  in some foreign economies as authorities eased  social-distancing restraints. The rapid spread of COVID-19 weighed  heavily on global risk sentiment, with financial  stresses intensifying and liquidity conditions  deteriorating in many foreign financial  markets. Aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy responses in the United States and  abroad, however, helped boost sentiment and  improve market functioning. On balance,  financial conditions abroad remain tighter  than at the beginning of the year, especially  in some emerging market economies. Since  February, global equity prices moved lower,  sovereign interest rates in the European  periphery increased somewhat, and measures  of sovereign spreads in emerging market  economies widened significantly. In many  advanced economies, long-term interest rates  reached historically low levels. Monetary Policy Easing monetary policy. In light of the effects  of COVID-19 on economic activity and  on risks to the outlook, the FOMC rapidly  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate. Specifically, at two meetings in March,  the FOMC lowered the target range for the  federal funds rate by a total of 1½ percentage  points, bringing it to the current range of 0 to  ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain  this target range until it is confident that the  economy has weathered recent events and is on  track to achieve its maximum-employment and  price-stability goals. The Committee noted that  it would continue to monitor the implications  of incoming information for the economic  outlook, including information related to  public health, as well as global developments  and muted inflation pressures, and that it  would use its tools and act as appropriate to  support the economy. Safeguarding market functioning. Market  functioning deteriorated in many markets  in late February and much of March,  including the critical Treasury and agency  MBS markets. The Federal Reserve swiftly  took a series of policy actions to address  these developments. The FOMC announced  it would purchase Treasury securities and  agency MBS in the amounts needed to  ensure smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy  to broader financial conditions. The Open  Market Desk began offering large-scale  overnight and term repurchase agreement  operations. The Federal Reserve coordinated  with other central banks to enhance the  provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  announced the establishment of temporary  U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap  lines) with additional central banks. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repurchase agreement facility for foreign  and international monetary authorities.  (Separately, the Board introduced several  facilities with the backing of the U.S. Treasury  to more directly support the flow of credit to  the economy.) Since these policy actions were  announced, the functioning of Treasury and  MBS markets has gradually improved.  Reflecting these policy  responses, the size of the Federal Reserve’s  balance sheet increased significantly. Fed Listens. The Federal Reserve has released a  report on its Fed Listens initiative. This initiative  is part of a broad review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices  the Federal Reserve uses to pursue its statutory  dual-mandate goals of maximum employment  and price stability. A key component of the  review was a series of public Fed Listens events  aimed at consulting with a broad range of  stakeholders in the U.S. economy on issues  pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives. Special Topics Disparities in job loss during the pandemic. The deterioration in labor market conditions  since February has been sudden, severe, and  widespread. At the same time, workers in  some industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations have experienced  more significant employment declines than  others. Although disparities in labor market  outcomes often arise during recessions, factors  unique to this episode have also contributed  to the recent divergence. Job losses have been  especially severe for those with lower earnings  and for the socioeconomic groups that are  disproportionately represented among low wage jobs.  Small businesses during the COVID-19 crisis. Small businesses make up nearly half of U.S.  private-sector employment and play key  roles in local communities. The pandemic  poses acute risks to the survival of many  small businesses. Their widespread failure  would adversely alter the economic landscape  of local communities and potentially slow  the economic recovery and future labor  productivity growth. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies  are making aggressive efforts to support small  businesses.  Federal fiscal policy response to COVID-19. While the economic consequences resulting  from the pandemic have been historically  large, the amount of fiscal support that has  been enacted constitutes the fastest and largest  fiscal response to any postwar economic  downturn. The pieces of legislation enacted  since the arrival of the pandemic that have  composed this response are expected to raise  government outlays and reduce tax revenues  by nearly $2 trillion in the current fiscal year.  Policy response to COVID-19 in foreign  economies. Authorities in many foreign  economies have implemented fiscal,  monetary, and regulatory measures to  mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Sizable fiscal packages targeted  the sudden loss of income by firms and  households. Actions by central banks,  including purchases of sovereign and  private bonds, have aimed to restore market  functioning, sustain the provision of credit  to businesses and households during the  pandemic, and support the economic recovery.  Regulatory changes have focused on ensuring  that banks sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to  lend to households and firms. (See the box  “Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Domestic Developments The COVID-19 outbreak has led to an  acute weakening in the labor market  since February  In response to the public health crisis caused  by the spread of COVID-19, households,  businesses, and governments took dramatic  measures to slow the spread of the virus. As  a result, many sectors of the economy were  effectively closed from mid-March through  April but have seen some gradual lifting of  restrictions since then. The severity, scope, and  speed of the ensuing downturn in economic  activity have been significantly worse than any  recession since World War II. After posting  strong gains in both January and February,  payroll employment plummeted by an  unprecedented 22 million in March and April  before adding back 2.5 million jobs in May. The unemployment rate jumped to  14.7 percent in April, the highest level since the  Great Depression. In May, the unemployment  rate fell to 13.3 percent, which was almost  10 percentage points above the February level. Although unemployment soared  for all major racial and ethnic groups, the  unemployment rate for Hispanics posted the  largest increase over this period.  Data received since the survey week for payroll  employment in May suggest that job gains  have continued.  Although initial claims for unemployment insurance have remained  high, it is unclear whether these new claims  reflect additional large numbers of layoffs  or that states are clearing their backlogs of  applications. In addition, weekly employment  data from the payroll processor ADP indicate  that rehiring has continued and that payroll  employment will likely move up again in June,  albeit from what remains a very low level. The labor force participation rate (LFPR)— the share of the population that is either  working or actively looking for work—fell  from around 63½ percent early this year  to 60.8 percent in May. The May  LFPR reading was one of the lowest since the  early 1970s.  Poor employment prospects or  concerns about safety in the workplace might  have caused some of the newly unemployed  to exit the labor force or induced others to  refrain from entering.  However, with so much of the labor market shut in and most new  hiring at a standstill, the distinction between  being unemployed and out of the labor  force likely has become especially blurred.  The employment-to-population ratio for  individuals 16 and over—the share of that  segment of the population who are working— combines movements in both unemployment  and labor force participation. This measure  was 51.3 percent in April and 52.8 percent in  May, the lowest readings in the history of this  series, which began in 1948. Wages are likely being held down,  although compositional shifts have  temporarily boosted some wage measures While reliable data are limited, anecdotal  evidence suggests that the economic downturn  is putting downward pressure on wages.  The series on wage growth computed by the  Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which  tracks the median 12-month wage growth  of individuals reporting to the Current  Population Survey, has changed little in  recent months.  In contrast,  measures that look at average wage costs have  jumped because of compositional effects,  as COVID-19 mitigation efforts and weaker  demand have disproportionately affected  lower-wage workers and left relatively more  higher-wage workers on payrolls. Indeed,  average hourly earnings from the payroll  survey jumped 6.7 percent over the 12 months  ending in May, largely reflecting this change in  the composition of private payrolls. In the first  quarter, both the employment cost index (ECI)  and compensation per hour, which include  both wages and benefits, posted moderate workers who expect them to be temporary.3  Research  has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer financial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations.5 gains, with neither series reflecting much of the  pandemic’s repercussions. Price inflation has moved significantly lower As measured by the 12-month change in  the price index for personal consumption  expenditures (PCE), inflation was just  0.5 percent in April, compared with 1.6 percent  over the same period a year ago. The  abrupt slowing in total PCE price inflation this  year partly reflects sharp declines in consumer  energy prices that resulted from the collapse in  oil prices. In contrast, food prices have moved  higher despite declines in food commodity  prices, likely reflecting higher demand at retail  grocery stores in combination with pandemic related supply chain issues. In addition to  the drop in energy prices, the unprecedented  reductions in demand for some services as a  result of social distancing have led to sharp  drops in prices for airfares and lodging away  from home. These price declines led the  12-month measure of core PCE inflation—that  is, inflation excluding volatile consumer food  and energy prices—to move significantly lower,  falling from 1.8 percent in February to just  1.0 percent in April, as the monthly readings  for March and April were exceptionally  low. An appreciation of the dollar has also  contributed to the slowing in core inflation.  The trimmed mean measure of PCE price  inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Dallas provides an alternative way  to purge measured inflation of transitory  influences, and it is less sensitive than the core  measure to extreme price movements such  as the recent outsized swings in airfares and  lodging.7  The 12-month change in this measure edged down to 1.9 percent in April from  2.1 percent in February. Oil prices are notably lower this spring Against the backdrop of a global collapse  in the demand for oil and a rapid increase in  oil inventories, the Brent price of crude oil  plunged from about $65 per barrel in early  January to around $20 per barrel at the end  of April.  More recently, prices  have rebounded to about $40 per barrel, as  an agreement between OPEC (Organization  of the Petroleum Exporting Countries)  and Russia to cut oil production by nearly  10 percent of global output appears to have  taken effect. Additionally, the dramatic  downturn in global oil demand appears to  be abating as countries begin to ease their  COVID-19 lockdown policies. The decline  in oil prices has contributed to similar  movements in retail gasoline prices, which have  also fallen in recent months. Reported prices of imports other than  energy fell After rising early this year, nonfuel import  prices fell in April, as the dollar appreciated  and the sharp decline in global demand put  downward pressure on non-oil commodity  prices—a substantial component of nonfuel  import prices. Prices of industrial  metals fell sharply in the first months of the  year but edged up in May, as economic activity  in some economies began to revive. However, survey-based measures of  long-run inflation expectations have been  broadly stable . . .  Despite the tumultuous situation of recent  months, survey-based measures of inflation  expectations at medium- and longer-term  horizons, which likely influence actual  inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting  decisions, so far have changed little.  In the University of Michigan Surveys of  Consumers, the median value for inflation  expectations over the next 5 to 10 years was  2.7 percent in May and has fluctuated around  2½ percent since the end of 2016. In the  Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted  by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,  the median of respondents’ expected inflation  rate three years ahead moved lower, on net, in  the second half of last year and has averaged  2.5 percent since. In the Survey of Professional  Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve  Bank of Philadelphia, the median expectation  for the annual rate of increase in the PCE price  index over the next 10 years edged down to  1.9 percent in the second-quarter survey, below  the 2 percent level that had been reported for  some time. . . . but market-based measures of  inflation compensation are notably lower Market-based measures of inflation  compensation can also be used to make  inferences about inflation expectations.  However, the inference is not straightforward  because market-based measures can be  importantly affected by changes in premiums  that provide compensation for bearing  inflation and liquidity risks. Measures of  longer-term inflation compensation—derived  either from differences between yields on  nominal Treasury securities and those on  comparable-maturity Treasury InflationProtected Securities (TIPS) or from inflation  swaps—have decreased, on net, since the  end of 2019. The 5-year and  5-to-10-year-forward measures of inflation  compensation are about 60 basis points and  40 basis points lower, respectively, than at the beginning of the year.  Both measures dropped  sharply in March, with the 5-year measure  reaching the lowest level since the Global  Financial Crisis and the 5-to-10-year measure  hitting new historical lows. These declines  partly reflected a reduction in the relative  liquidity of TIPS compared with nominal  Treasury securities. As liquidity improved,  inflation compensation partially retraced. The  TIPS-based measure of 5-to-10-year-forward  inflation compensation and the analogous  measure from inflation swaps are now about  1½ percent and 1¾ percent, respectively.10 Real gross domestic product has  contracted severely and with  unprecedented speed  After posting a moderate gain in 2019, real  gross domestic product (GDP) fell at an  annual rate of 5 percent in the first quarter,  with that decline likely all occurring in the final  weeks of the quarter. In the second  quarter, real GDP appears to be plummeting at  a breathtaking pace. Indeed, many professional  forecasters are projecting second-quarter  real GDP to fall at an annual rate of 30 to  40 percent. This severe contraction reflects a  steep drop in consumer spending associated  with measures to contain the spreading virus.  Uncertainty about the economic outlook  also likely has pushed down business fixed  investment, and events abroad have led to a  steep drop in exports. In the manufacturing  sector, output fell sharply in March and posted  its largest decline on record in April as many  factories closed temporarily for all or most of both months. This decrease in factory output  included nearly all motor vehicle and civilian  aircraft manufacturers. However, amid some  easing of restrictions, there are signs that  manufacturing activity moved up in May,  partly as a result of the ramp-up in automotive  production. Social distancing has led to a dramatic  plunge in household spending and  earnings  After having increased at a solid 2.7 percent  pace in 2019, real PCE fell at an annual rate  of 6.8 percent in the first quarter of 2020, one  of the largest quarterly drops in the history  of this series. As concerns about  the virus outbreak grew and government  restrictions mounted, real PCE collapsed,  falling 6.7 percent in March and a record  13.2 percent in April. Although indicators  point to an increase in May—which is  consistent with some relaxation of government  restrictions—taken together, the April data  and May indicators point to an unprecedented  decline in second-quarter consumer outlays.  Real disposable personal income (DPI), a  measure of households’ after-tax purchasing  power, fell in the first quarter, mostly because  of a drop in household income from wages  and salaries. However, in April, real DPI  jumped 13½ percent, pushing its April level  up relative to the fourth quarter at an annual  rate of more than 30 percent. Although  aggregate earnings from employment  collapsed in April, this income loss was more  than offset by government income support  from unemployment insurance and stimulus  payments.12 With households unwilling or  unable to spend a commensurate amount of  their available aggregate income, the April  saving rate shot up to 33 percent. Consumer sentiment has tumbled . . . Households’ concerns about their economic  situation, as reflected in consumer sentiment,  may be leading them to save more for  precautionary reasons. The University of  Michigan Surveys of Consumers index of  consumer sentiment dropped almost 29 points  between February and May, with  declines in both the current and expected  conditions indexes. The Conference Board  survey measure in May also was down sharply  from February, with respondents similarly  grim about current prospects but somewhat  more upbeat than in the Michigan survey  about future conditions.  . . . and overall household wealth fell in  the first quarter  In the first quarter, the ratio of aggregate  household net worth to household income  fell, driven by sharp declines in equity prices.  House prices—which tend to  respond to economic developments more  slowly than equity prices and are of particular  importance for the value of assets held by a  large portion of households—continued to  increase in the first quarter and moved up  further in April Since March,  equity prices have posted sizable gains but are  still below their February peak.  Consumer lending standards have  become less accommodative, but credit  is still available to households with strong  credit profiles  Since the onset of the pandemic, consumer  lending standards have become less  accommodative on balance. Borrowing  conditions are tight for individuals with low  credit ratings, but credit remains available to  those with strong credit profiles. Nevertheless,  consumer borrowing has fallen as spending  has slumped. While banks have  tightened lending standards on credit card and  auto loans, according to the April Senior Loan  Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending  Practices (SLOOS), captive auto lenders have  rolled out generous loan incentives to boost sales. Due to the high cost of servicing  loans in forbearance and uncertainty about  whether borrowers will be able to resume  making payments when the forbearance period  ends, mortgages have become hard to obtain  for borrowers with low credit scores or with  incomes that are difficult to document. Credit  conditions have also tightened significantly for  other higher-risk loans, such as jumbo loans  and cash-out refinances, and the increase in  costs and risks associated with originating  mortgages has raised primary mortgage rates  relative to yields on mortgage-backed securities  (MBS). Nevertheless, mortgage rates currently  have fluctuated around the lowest levels seen in  the past 10 years.  Housing-sector activity has fallen sharply  after starting the year on a solid footing . . . After turning up starting around the middle  of 2019 as mortgage rates moved lower, new  home sales, existing home sales, and single family starts and permits have posted outsized  declines beginning in March that are all  close to the largest ever recorded. Similarly, the COVID-19 outbreak  and mitigation efforts have caused households’  perceptions of homebuying conditions and  builders’ ratings of current sales to move down  despite historically low mortgage rates.  . . . and business fixed investment has  tumbled . . .  The pandemic has curtailed business  investment, as many investment projects were  delayed or canceled because of lower profit  expectations, concerns about future demand,  reduced credit availability, and uncertainty  about how businesses will operate in the  future. Real business fixed investment—that is,  private expenditures for equipment, structures,  research and development (R&D), and other  intellectual property—contracted at an annual  rate of about 8.0 percent in the first quarter  of 2020, coming off a drop of 0.4 percent  for 2019 as a whole. The decline  was centered in equipment investment as well as in outlays for nonresidential buildings. In  addition, lower oil prices contributed to a drop  in investment in drilling and mining structures.  Investment in intellectual property like  software, R&D, and entertainment originals  recorded a tepid increase in the first quarter  after posting solid gains in 2019. Forward looking indicators of business spending, such  as new orders of nondefense capital goods,  excluding the volatile aircraft category, have  plunged recently amid sharply lower business  sentiment and profit expectations from  industry analysts.  . . . while corporate financing conditions  have deteriorated  Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms  were robust early in the year but tumbled  during the global spread of COVID-19. The gross issuance of corporate  bonds in the investment-grade segment was  solid until late February, when it became  intermittent at best as market functioning  deteriorated. Meanwhile, issuance in the  speculative-grade segment was essentially  nonexistent following the broad risk-off  sentiment in the market over the public  health crisis. While investment-grade issuance  recovered at a strong pace following the  March Federal Reserve announcement on  corporate credit funding facilities, high-yield  issuance began to pick up only after the  April announcement to expand the facilities  to include support for some recent “fallen  angels”—bonds downgraded to a speculative grade credit rating from an investment-grade  rating because of declining credit quality— and high-yield exchange-traded funds. The  solvency outlook of corporate bonds for  both the investment- and speculative-grade  segments of the market dropped over the first half of the year as the pace of downgrades  intensified and the volume of defaults picked  up. Furthermore, the monthly volume of  fallen angels reached a record high in March,  and market analysts forecast this trend to  continue with a record annual volume of  debt being downgraded to high yield this  year amid declining earnings and elevated  leverage. Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury securities  have widened substantially amid worsening  credit conditions. Institutional leveraged  loan issuance volume was robust to start the  first quarter, but it subsequently came to a  standstill in March because of the pandemic.  Newly launched volume increased somewhat  starting in April but remains at subdued  levels. Banks tightened standards and terms  significantly on commercial and industrial  (C&I) loans, according to respondents to  the April SLOOS, and demand for C&I  loans strengthened amid concerns about the  pandemic. C&I loan growth at banks has  picked up in the first half of the year, largely  driven by soaring credit-line drawdowns  since the beginning of March, as firms with  existing credit lines sought to increase their  internal cash buffers, and by lending to smaller  businesses through the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) since April. Both exports and imports declined  sharply in the first quarter The sudden drop in global demand and  production and stifled global value chains took  a toll on international trade. U.S. real exports  of goods and services in the first quarter  declined at an annual rate of nearly 9 percent,  as exports of services—including travel to  the United States—plunged. Real  imports fell just over 15 percent, as U.S.  consumers and firms cut back on spending,  travel abroad halted, and shipments of  imported goods were delayed. The trade deficit, relative to GDP, narrowed in the first  quarter compared with 2019. Federal fiscal stimulus will provide  substantial support to economic activity  in 2020 while also significantly boosting  the budget deficit and debt . . . Federal fiscal policy measures enacted in  response to the pandemic have provided  income support for households and businesses;  increased grants-in-aid to state and local  governments; and facilitated loans to  businesses, households, states, and localities.  The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)  projects that in fiscal year 2020, the additional  federal government expenditures and foregone  revenues from these policies will total more  than $2 trillion, around 10 percent of nominal  GDP. In addition, the decline in economic activity has pushed  down tax collections while pushing up outlays  for certain transfer programs—most notably  for unemployment insurance and Medicaid.  These tax decreases and transfer increases, working in tandem with the  discretionary stimulus, will support aggregate  demand and help blunt the extent of the  economic downturn.  The combination of the discretionary stimulus  measures and the response of receipts and  expenditures to the decline in economic  activity—referred to as automatic stabilizers— are expected to cause the budget deficit to  balloon from its already elevated level. The  CBO expects the federal unified budget deficit  to widen from 4½ percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2019 to 18 percent of nominal GDP  in fiscal 2020, the largest annual deficit as a  share of GDP in the post–World War II era. The ratio of federal debt held by the public  to nominal GDP is expected to rise from  79 percent in fiscal 2019 to 101 percent by the  end of fiscal 2020, the highest debt-to-GDP  ratio since 1947. . . . and state and local governments  confront a fiscal crisis as tax  revenue shrinks A sharp reduction in tax revenues due to  a collapse in income and retail sales tax  revenue is placing significant stress on state  governments. Local governments, which rely  on more cyclically stable property taxes, will be  somewhat less directly affected. Nevertheless,  local governments rely on aid from their  state governments, particularly for primary  and secondary education, and the budget  strains at the state level will therefore likely be  passed down to localities. In April and May,  state and local governments shed more than  1½ million jobs as schools and universities  closed early and local governments reduced  their noneducation workforce. These state  and local budget strains will be partially offset  by grants from the federal government.  Risks to the outlook are greater than usual The path ahead is extraordinarily uncertain.  First and foremost, the pace of recovery will  ultimately depend on the evolution of the  COVID-19 outbreak in the United States  and abroad and the measures undertaken to  contain it. Importantly, some small businesses  and highly leveraged firms might have to shut  down permanently or declare bankruptcy,  which could have longer-lasting repercussions  on productive capacity. (For a more in-depth  discussion of the potential consequences of  the shutdowns on small businesses, see the  box “Small Businesses during the COVID-19  Crisis.”) In addition, there is uncertainty about  future labor demand and productivity as firms  shift their production processes to increase  worker safety, realign their supply chains,  or move services online. Furthermore, if  employees are not called back to their former  jobs, their period of unemployment could  increase, potentially leading to lower wages  when they do eventually find a job. Finally,  applications for employer identification  numbers, which are an early indicator of new  business formations, are tracking well below  levels from recent years and may suggest a  slower pace of future job creation through  this channel.  Financial Developments The expected path of the federal funds  rate over the next several years has fallen  to near zero The expected path of the federal funds rate  over the next several years has declined since  early January and is now flat at the effective  lower bound for the next few years.  Before the Federal Reserve lowered the  target range for the federal funds rate to 0  to ¼ percent in March, policy expectations  dropped substantially in late February  and early March as COVID-19 concerns  intensified. Market-based measures suggest  that the expected federal funds rate remains  below 0.25 percent through mid-2023.18 Survey-based measures of the expected path  of the policy rate also moved down from the  levels observed at the end of 2019. According  to the results of the Survey of Primary Dealers  and Survey of Market Participants, both  conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York in April, the median of respondents’  modal projections implies a flat trajectory for  the target range of the federal funds rate at the  effective lower bound for the next few years.19 The U.S. nominal Treasury yield curve has  shifted down sharply . . . After moving lower over the second half of  2019, nominal Treasury yields fell sharply in  late February and early March as investors’  concerns regarding the implications of  the COVID-19 outbreak for the economic  outlook led to both falling policy expectations  and flight-to-safety flows, with longer term Treasury security yields dropping to  historically low levels. Longer term yields increased moderately and realized  volatility spiked for a period in March as  selling pressures grew, leading to dealer  balance sheet capacity constraints and  impaired trading conditions, before falling  back again after the Federal Reserve’s actions  helped restore smooth market functioning.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and  MBS Markets” in Part 2 for a more detailed  description of the Treasury market during  March.) More recently, yields on longer-term  Treasury securities rose somewhat, linked at  least partially to the expected increase in the  issuance of longer-term Treasury securities  as well as some improvement in investor  sentiment. Options prices suggest that near term uncertainty about longer-dated Treasury  yields rose sharply in March to levels not  seen since the Global Financial Crisis before  retracing. . . . but spreads of other long-term debt  to Treasury securities rose  Yields on 30-year agency MBS—an important  determinant of mortgage interest rates— decreased somewhat, on balance, though less  than the yields on nominal Treasury securities,  since the start of the year and remained very  low by historical standards.  Early in the year, yields on both investment and speculative-grade corporate bonds as  well as primary- and secondary-market  municipal bonds were near record lows. Spreads on corporate bond yields  over comparable-maturity Treasury yields  were in the lower end of their historical  distribution. Since mid-February, corporate  spreads have increased appreciably as market  functioning deteriorated and credit quality  declined. In March, spreads to comparable maturity Treasury securities increased sharply  for corporate debt but remained below those  observed during the 2008 Global Financial  Crisis. Spreads started to normalize following  the Federal Reserve announcements of  corporate bond facilities in late March,  particularly for investment-grade corporate  debt, but remain higher than at the end  of 2019. Similarly, yields and spreads for  municipal debt rose strikingly in March, with  spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury  securities spiking to their highest level since the  Global Financial Crisis as market functioning  declined and concerns about municipal  credit quality arose. Yields on municipal debt  partially recovered following Federal Reserve  announcements in late March and April of  support to municipal debt markets through  liquidity facilities.  Liquidity in markets for Treasury  securities and mortgage-backed securities  deteriorated sharply before recovering  following various Federal Reserve actions A number of indicators of Treasury market  functioning—including bid-ask spreads, bid sizes, estimates of transaction costs, and  measures of market depth—deteriorated  significantly in late February and March, but  conditions improved considerably following  Federal Reserve asset purchases and the  creation of credit and liquidity facilities.  Bid-ask spreads remain  higher than those seen at the end of the year  in the off-the-run market and for the 30-year  bond in the on-the-run market, and market  depth remains low. MBS spreads have fallen  back markedly, but prepayment risk and  uncertainty about forbearance continue to put  upward pressure on spreads. Strains remain in  some less liquid parts of the market.  Broad equity prices dropped notably  amid the global spread of COVID-19  before rebounding  Equity prices continued to increase early in the  year before tumbling in March, dropping as  much as 34 percent from peak to trough. Prices  have mostly recovered against a background  of unprecedented, forceful, and rapid  monetary and fiscal policy responses as well  as recent tentative signs of economic revival  associated with the easing of restrictions and  in the face of bleak forecasts for U.S. firms’  earnings in 2020. The decline in  stock prices was widespread across all sectors,  with the largest declines in the energy and  banking sectors. Measures of implied and  realized stock price volatility for the S&P  500 index—the VIX and the 20-day realized  volatility—spiked to levels that were most  recently observed during the financial crisis. They have since retraced much of  that increase but remain at elevated levels. (For  a discussion of financial stability issues, see  the box “Developments Related to Financial  Stability.”) While overnight money market rates  generally moved down in line with  decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s target range, short-term  funding markets experienced strains  before the announcement and launch of  Federal Reserve facilities Decreases in the Federal Open Market  Committee’s (FOMC) target range for the  federal funds rate in March transmitted  effectively through overnight money markets,  with yields on a broad set of money market  instruments moving lower in response to  the FOMC’s policy actions. Over the first  half of the year, the effective federal funds  rate (EFFR) remained within the target  range. After printing at the top  of the target range for a few days following  the March 15 rate cut, the EFFR softened  considerably to trade near the bottom of the  range amid substantial increases in reserves.  Though upward pressures on interest rates  in overnight money markets were generally  well contained during March, short-term  funding markets experienced a liquidity  squeeze. Certain other short-term interest  rates, including those pertaining to commercial  paper and negotiable certificates of deposit,  moved up markedly. However, since the  announcement and launch of the Federal  Reserve liquidity facilities directed toward  these markets, short-term funding rates have  declined significantly.  Bank credit continued to expand, while  bank profitability declined Aggregate credit provided by commercial  banks trended up through the first half of  2020, driven largely by soaring C&I creditline drawdowns since early March and by  loans originated under the PPP since April.  While commercial real estate loan  growth remained strong, growth in residential  real estate loans on banks’ balance sheets has  slowed since the beginning of the year, and  outstanding consumer loans contracted in April. First-quarter earnings reports of larger  banks indicate that bank profitability declined  considerably in the first quarter of 2020  because of narrower net interest margins and  notable increases in loan loss provisions.20 International Developments  Economic activity abroad plunged in the  first half of the year The spread of COVID-19 throughout the  world and the measures taken to contain it  have produced devastating effects on the global  economy. Many countries closed nonessential  businesses and restricted people’s movement  during the first months of the year, leading  to a sharp global economic contraction.  Foreign GDP declined at about a 13 percent  annualized rate in the first quarter, and recent  indicators point to an even larger contraction  in the second quarter. Available  data suggest that the decline in foreign activity  in the first half of the year has been greater  than during the Global Financial Crisis. The collapse in economic activity across  countries followed the progression of the  virus. In China, where regions underwent  strict lockdowns as early as January, GDP  in the first quarter dropped at a stunning  36 percent annualized rate. As the  virus spread to Europe, many countries in  the region imposed strict social-distancing  restrictions; euro-area GDP contracted nearly  14 percent in the first quarter of 2020. The  substantial decline in commodity prices also  depressed activity of commodity exporters  such as Canada and several Latin American  countries. Recent data indicate that Chinese  production began to revive in the spring,  as infection rates fell and restrictions were gradually lifted. Indicators of  Chinese consumption, however, remain weak.  A number of advanced foreign economies  (AFEs) began to relax social-distancing  restraints in recent weeks. Labor market conditions deteriorated and  inflation fell . . . Amid widespread business closures and  collapsing demand, labor market conditions  abroad have deteriorated sharply in recent  months, albeit with differences across  countries. Several European and Asian  countries have thus far experienced sizable  declines in hours worked but relatively small  increases in unemployment given the size  of the drop in economic activity, partly  reflecting direct wage subsidies provided by the  governments to keep workers on firms’ payrolls.  In other countries, unemployment  rates increased markedly.  Although the shutdowns across the world  have reduced the global supply of goods and  services, the depressive effects on demand of  lower income, social distancing, and increased  uncertainty have predominated, driving down  inflation in the foreign economies. In several  AFEs, recent inflation readings have been well  below central bank targets, reflecting large  declines in energy prices as well as subdued  core inflation. . . . prompting swift and substantial  policy responses Foreign fiscal authorities have aimed to fill  income gaps resulting from businesses closing  and workers staying home. Many national  governments acted decisively to support firms’  balance sheets through tax deferrals, loans,  and loan guarantees; to encourage firms to  retain workers through wage subsidies; and to  support household spending through enhanced  unemployment benefits and cash transfers.  In addition, many foreign central banks  reduced their policy rates, initiated or  enhanced credit facilities, and relaxed capital requirements for financial institutions.  Several AFE central banks also ramped  up asset purchase programs to alleviate  liquidity strains in their domestic capital  markets. Some emerging market economy  (EME) central banks followed suit. See  the box “Policy Response to COVID-19 in  Foreign Economies” for a more detailed  discussion of fiscal and monetary policies  implemented abroad. Downside risks remain high Despite aggressive fiscal and monetary  policy actions, risks abroad are skewed to  the downside. The future progression of the  pandemic remains highly uncertain, with  resurgence of the outbreak a substantial  risk. In addition, the economic damage of  the recession may be quite persistent. The  collapse in demand may ultimately bankrupt  many businesses, thereby reducing business  dynamism and innovation. Unlike past  recessions, services activity has dropped  more sharply than manufacturing—with  restrictions on movement severely curtailing  expenditures on travel, tourism, restaurants,  and recreation—and social-distancing  requirements and attitudes may further weigh  on the recovery in these sectors. Disruptions  to global trade may also result in a costly  reconfiguration of global supply chains.  Persistently weak consumer and firm demand  may push medium- and longer-term inflation  expectations well below central bank targets,  particularly in regions with already low  inflation at the onset of the recession. Finally,  additional expansionary fiscal policies— possibly in response to future large-scale  outbreaks of COVID-19—could significantly  increase government debt and add to sovereign  risk, especially for countries with already  limited fiscal space.  Financial conditions abroad tightened,  especially in some emerging market  economies The precipitous spread of COVID-19 in the  first months of the year weighed heavily on global risk sentiment, and many financial  markets suffered from severe illiquidity.  Aggressive fiscal and monetary policy  responses in the United States and abroad,  however, helped boost sentiment and improve  market functioning, contributing to a partial  retracement. On net, financial conditions  abroad remain tighter than at the beginning of  the year, especially in some EMEs.  Financial conditions in the AFEs largely  tracked financial market developments in the  United States. Major AFE equity indexes  dropped substantially as news about the spread  of COVID-19 and the associated measures  to contain it were reported, but those indexes  rebounded following the announcement of  extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy  actions and, more recently, tentative signs  of economic stabilization.  Notwithstanding temporary increases due to  poor market functioning, long-term sovereign  yields in major advanced economies fell, on  net, as flight-to-safety demand surged, policy  rates reached their effective lower bounds in  several countries, and expectations of future  policy rates declined markedly.  Sovereign interest rates for economies in the  euro-area periphery were sensitive to news  about the size and form of European-wide  fiscal support for the recovery and, on net,  remain a bit higher than at the beginning of  the year. In recent months, Fitch  and DBRS Morningstar downgraded Italy’s  long-term debt ratings. Financial conditions in some EMEs tightened,  especially in Latin American countries. Equity  indexes suffered widespread losses early in  the year, and rebounds since then have been  uneven across countries. While equity indexes  in emerging Asia partially recovered, Mexican  and Brazilian equity indexes underperformed  other EME equities. In March,  borrowing rates for corporations increased  to levels not seen since the Global Financial  Crisis, although they have subsequently  declined somewhat. In the first half of the  year, funds dedicated to investing in EMEs experienced outflows, and sovereign borrowing  spreads increased sharply before moving down  more recently. The tightening in  some EME financial conditions appears to  reflect investors’ preference for safe and liquid  assets; a reduced confidence in the ability  of some governments to contain the health  crisis; and heightened uncertainty about the  prospects for EME public finances, commodity  prices, and global trade. The dollar appreciated The foreign exchange value of the dollar  increased nearly 5 percent since the start of  the year, as the boost from safe-haven demand  outweighed the effects of lower U.S. interest  rates. On a trade-weighted basis,  the dollar increased about 1.5 percent against  AFE currencies and 7 percent against EME  currencies. The Mexican peso and Brazilian  real depreciated about 16 percent and  30 percent, respectively, partly in response to  lower commodity prices. The Chinese renminbi  fluctuated largely in response to news about  the outbreak and policy actions of Chinese  authorities and, on net, depreciated slightly  since the beginning of the year. The Federal Open Market Committee  quickly reduced the federal funds rate to  the effective lower bound . . . In light of the effects of COVID-19 on the  economy and on risks to the outlook, the  Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)  lowered the target range for the federal funds  rate by a total of 1½ percentage points—from  a range of 1½ to 1¾ percent to one of 0 to  ¼ percent—over two meetings in early and  mid-March (figure 46).21 Specifically, in early  March, the Committee lowered the target  range for the federal funds rate ½ percentage  point, to 1 to 1¼ percent. In mid-March, the  Committee further lowered the target range  1 percentage point, to 0 to ¼ percent. The  Committee expects to maintain this target  range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to  achieve its maximum-employment and price stability goals. In connection with the changes  in the target range, the Federal Reserve  reduced the interest paid on reserve balances  and decreased the interest rate offered on  overnight reverse repurchase agreements at the  two March meetings. . . . and the FOMC increased the holdings  of Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities in the System  Open Market Account At its mid-March meeting, along with its  decision to lower the target range for the  federal funds rate, the FOMC emphasized  that it is prepared to use its full range of tools  to support the flow of credit to households  and businesses, thereby promoting its  maximum-employment and price-stability  goals. To support the smooth functioning of  markets for Treasury securities and agency  mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—markets  central to the flow of credit to households and businesses—the Committee announced  that it would increase its holdings of  Treasury securities by at least $500 billion  and its holdings of agency MBS by at least  $200 billion over coming months.  (See the box “Federal Reserve Actions to  Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury  and MBS Markets.”) Later in March,  the Committee announced that it would  continue to purchase Treasury securities  and agency MBS in the amounts needed to  support smooth market functioning and the  effective transmission of monetary policy to  broader financial conditions. The  Committee also included agency commercial  MBS in its purchases for the first time. In  June, the Committee announced that, over  coming months, the Federal Reserve will  increase its holdings of Treasury securities  and agency residential and commercial MBS  at least at the current pace to sustain smooth  market functioning, thereby fostering effective  transmission of monetary policy to broader  financial conditions.  The Federal Reserve has continued rolling  over at auction all principal payments from its  holdings of Treasury securities. Before mid-March, to allow for a gradual runoff  of agency securities, the Federal Reserve  reinvested principal payments from agency  debt and agency MBS of up to $20 billion per  month in Treasury securities; agency MBS  principal payments in excess of $20 billion  each month were reinvested in agency MBS.  Beginning in mid-March, the Committee  announced it would reinvest all principal  payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings  of agency debt and agency MBS back into  agency MBS. (The box “Developments on the  Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet” discusses  changes in the size and composition of the  Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the  past year.) The Federal Reserve eased lending terms  for primary credit borrowing . . . Primary credit is the Federal Reserve lending  program available to depository institutions  in generally sound financial condition. Amid  increasing stress in funding markets in mid-March, the Federal Reserve announced  several changes to the primary credit program.  Importantly, the primary credit rate was set at  the top of the target range for the federal funds  rate rather than 50 basis points above the top  of the range. The term of primary credit loans,  which had previously been mainly overnight  advances, was extended to allow depository  institutions to borrow for up to 90 days.  Federal Reserve communication encouraged  the use of the discount window to help meet  the demand for credit from households and  businesses. Discount window borrowing under the  primary credit program increased significantly  following these developments. Primary  credit outstanding reached a peak of around  $50 billion in late March 2020—its highest  level since the financial crisis and well above  the typical level of around $10 million that  prevailed in 2019. Use of primary credit was  fairly widespread, with discount window loans  being extended to institutions across a range  of size categories. Overall, the outstanding  amount of primary credit loans declined to  about $10 billion by early June. . . . and undertook actions with other  central banks to support U.S. dollar  funding markets The Federal Reserve announced coordinated  actions with other central banks to enhance  the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S.  dollar liquidity swap line arrangements and  the establishment of temporary U.S. dollar  liquidity arrangements (swap lines) with  nine additional central banks. The size of the swap lines  increased from close to zero in mid-March to  almost $450 billion by the end of April. The  Federal Reserve also established a temporary  repo facility for foreign and international  monetary authorities. The FOMC is committed to using its tools  to promote maximum employment and  price stability The ongoing public health crisis will weigh  heavily on economic activity, employment,  and inflation in the near term and pose  considerable risks to the economic outlook  over the medium term. The FOMC is  committed to using its full range of tools to  support the U.S. economy in this challenging  time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price-stability goals. The  Committee will continue to monitor the  implications of incoming information for the  economic outlook, including information  related to public health, as well as global  developments and muted inflation pressures,  and it will use its tools and act as appropriate  to support the economy. The Federal Reserve has continued  to review its strategic framework for  monetary policy In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad  review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices it uses to  pursue its statutory dual-mandate goals of  maximum employment and price stability. A  key component of the review was a series of  public Fed Listens events. The Federal Reserve  held 14 events around the country in 2019 to  consult with a range of organizations on the  effects that labor market conditions, inflation,  and interest rates have on them and their  communities. In light of the rapidly changing  public health and economic environments due  to COVID-19, the Federal Reserve convened  another event in May 2020 to get an update.  The Federal Reserve has released a report on  its Fed Listens initiative. The lessons learned from the Fed Listens initiative were never more  important than they are today as Americans  navigate through these challenging times.  The Federal Reserve expects to complete  the review of its monetary policy strategy,  tools, and communication practices later this  year. The Federal Reserve remains focused  on the attainment of its goals of maximum  employment and price stability, including  laying the foundation for the return to a strong  labor market. Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open  Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held  on June 9–10, 2020, meeting participants  submitted their projections of the most likely  outcomes for real gross domestic product  (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and  inflation for each year from 2020 through 2022  and over the longer run. Each participant’s  projections were based on information  available at the time of the meeting, together  with his or her assessment of appropriate  monetary policy and assumptions about other  factors likely to affect economic outcomes.  The longer-run projections represent each  participant’s assessment of the value to which  each variable would be expected to converge,  over time, under appropriate monetary policy  and in the absence of further shocks to the  economy. “Appropriate monetary policy”  is defined as the future path of policy  that each participant deems most likely to  foster outcomes for economic activity  and inflation that best satisfy his or her  individual interpretation of the Federal  Reserve’s congressionally mandated goals of  promoting maximum employment and  price stability. All participants judged that the uncertainty  attending their projections was higher than  the average of the past 20 years. The median  of participants’ projections for real GDP  growth was negative 6.5 percent for 2020,  with individual projections ranging from  negative 10.0 to negative 4.2 percent (table 1 and figure 1). The median of projections for  real GDP growth was 5.0 percent for 2021 and  3.5 percent for 2022. The median assessment  of real GDP growth in the longer run was  1.8 percent, down 0.1 percentage point since  the December 2019 projections included in the  February 2020 Monetary Policy Report. The median of projections for the  unemployment rate in the fourth quarter  of 2020 was 9.3 percent, with individual  projections ranging from 7.0 to 14.0 percent.  The median of projections for the  unemployment rate was 6.5 percent and  5.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2021 and  2022, respectively. These values are above the  median assessment of the longer-run normal  unemployment rate, 4.1 percent, which was  unchanged from December. The median of projections for inflation, as  measured by changes in the price index for  personal consumption expenditures (PCE),  was 0.8 percent for 2020, 1.6 percent for  2021, and 1.7 percent for 2022. Almost all  participants expected inflation to run below  the Committee’s longer-run objective of  2 percent through 2022. The medians of  projections for core PCE inflation were  1.0 percent for this year, 1.5 percent for 2021,  and 1.7 percent for 2022. With regard to participants’ projections  of appropriate monetary policy, almost  all participants expected to maintain the  target range for the federal funds rate at  0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of  2022. These projections represent  participants’ individual assessments of  appropriate policy consistent with their  projections of economic growth, employment,  inflation, and other factors. However, the  economic outlook is inherently uncertain; thus,  each participant’s assessment of appropriate  policy is also necessarily uncertain and will  change in response to changes to the economic  outlook and associated risks. The median  estimate of the longer-run level for the federal  funds rate, 2.5 percent, was unchanged from  December. A more complete description of the Summary of  Economic Projections will be released with the  minutes of the June 9–10, 2020, FOMC meeting  on July 1. Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic For nearly all industries, occupations, demographic  groups, and locations, employment was substantially  lower in May than in February. While job loss has been  pervasive, some groups have experienced more severe  employment declines than others, particularly workers  with lower earnings and the socioeconomic groups that  are disproportionately represented among low-wage  jobs; employment declines have also been larger in  some states than in others. Although disparities in labor  market outcomes across groups often widen during  recessions, certain factors unique to this episode—in  particular, the social-distancing measures taken by  households, businesses, and governments to limit  in-person interactions—have contributed to the recent  divergence. Because jobs differ in the degree to which they  involve personal contact and physical proximity, in  whether they provide an “essential function,” and in  whether their business operations can be conducted  remotely, social-distancing measures have had  disparate consequences across industries and, in  turn, on particular types of workers who tend to work  in heavily affected industries. For example, the net  proportion of jobs lost since February has been greater  in industries such as accommodation and food services  (where social-distancing regulations have severely  affected many businesses and where workers are  frequently unable to work from home) and smaller in  industries such as professional and business services  and financial activities (where workers may be less  affected by social distancing and are generally more  able to conduct work from home).  In keeping with this  pattern, states that rely heavily on tourism—such as  Hawaii and Nevada—saw exceptionally large increases  in unemployment through April (the most recent month  for which state unemployment rate data are available). Net job loss since February thus far has been  concentrated in lower-wage industries, suggesting that  employment declines have been disproportionately large among lower-paid workers who may be less  able to financially weather an extended period of  unemployment. Indeed, estimates of employment  declines based on a worker’s previous wage (using data  from the payroll provider ADP), shown in figure A, also  indicate this disproportionate pattern of job loss. From  February to mid-April, employment fell substantially  more for workers who were previously earning wages  in the bottom fourth of wage earners, compared with  other workers. Despite somewhat more rapid job  growth for lower-wage earners in subsequent weeks,  employment for lower-wage earners remains roughly  35 percent lower than in February, compared with  5 to 15 percent lower employment for higher-wage  earners. These differences are also consistent with  results from a recent survey conducted by the Federal  Reserve Board that indicated that among households  with an annual income of $40,000 or less, nearly  40 percent of individuals who were employed in  February experienced job loss in March or early April,  compared with 20 percent of the population overall. Figure B illustrates that the decline in employment  (as a fraction of the population) has also been especially  large for people aged 16 to 24 compared with older  workers, for people without a bachelor’s degree  compared with those with at least a bachelor’s degree,  and for Hispanics compared with other races and  ethnicities. In addition, employment rates have dropped  somewhat more for women than for men, and for  Asians and African Americans compared with whites. In  general, the groups with the larger employment declines  are most commonly employed in the industries that have  experienced the greatest net employment declines thus  far, such as accommodation, food service, and retail  trade; these demographic groups are also less likely to  report being able to work from home. In the months ahead, labor market prospects for the  unemployed and underemployed—both overall and  for particularly hard-hit groups of workers—will largely  depend on the course of the COVID-19 outbreak  itself and on actions taken to halt its spread. Recent  job losses differ from those of previous recessions  not only in the suddenness and severity with which  they occurred, but also in the unusually high share of workers who expect them to be temporary.  Research  has shown that workers who return to their previous  employers after a temporary layoff tend to earn wages  similar to what they were making previously, whereas  laid-off workers who do not return to their previous  employer experience a longer-lasting decline in  earnings.  If public health conditions improve quickly  so that social-distancing measures can be further  relaxed and consumers become more willing to  engage in a wider range of commercial activities, workers’ expectations of being recalled may prove  true, and many recent job losses may turn out to be  temporary layoffs from which workers can quickly  recover. However, if economic activity remains weak  for a prolonged period, businesses that had intended  to reopen at full capacity may instead be compelled  to shutter completely or to resume operations at a  diminished scale, turning many temporary layoffs  into permanent job losses. Perhaps reflecting this  possibility, the number of unemployed workers  reporting that they had permanently separated from  their previous employer rose by roughly 300,000  between April and May, even as the total number of  unemployed persons began to decline. As lower-paid  workers are disproportionately employed by small  businesses—which typically have fewer financial  resources than larger fi rms—they may be at heightened  risk of seeing their former employers shut down and  hence experiencing the scarring effects of permanent  separations. Federal Fiscal Policy Response to COVID-19 In response to the immense health and economic  consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal  lawmakers have enacted a variety of measures. These  measures are expected to raise government outlays and  reduce tax revenues—the sum of which we refer to as  fiscal support—by nearly $2½ trillion over 10 years, of  which about $2 trillion is expected in the current fiscal  year, according to the Congressional Budget Office  (CBO). The legislation also included  $454 billion for the Department of the Treasury to fund  lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve  and $46 billion to provide loans to the airline industry. Consistent with the historically large economic  consequences resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic,  the amount of fiscal support that has been enacted  constitutes the fastest and largest fiscal response to any  postwar economic downturn. Figure B breaks down the estimated fiscal support  for fiscal year 2020 into four broad  categories: (1) direct aid to households, (2) loans or  grants to small businesses, (3) other aid to businesses,  and (4) government purchases of goods and services or  grants to state and local governments. The rest of this discussion provides a brief overview  of the main components of the four stimulus bills,  focusing on the CBO’s estimate of fiscal support  (increased outlays minus reduced tax revenues) for  fiscal 2020, organized by the four categories assigned  in the figure. Direct Aid to Households: $740 billion The largest component of income support is roughly  $290 billion in one-time payments to households.  These stimulus checks provide households with a  one-time refundable tax credit of $1,200 per adult  and $500 per child 16 and under, with a phaseout  at incomes between $75,000 and $100,000 for  individuals and between $150,000 and $200,000  for couples. By the end of May, according to the Treasury Department, nearly all of the stimulus checks  had been disbursed. The second major piece of  household income support is $230 billion in expanded  unemployment insurance (UI) benefits. UI benefits  were increased by $600 per week through the end of  July; eligibility was expanded through December for  “gig” workers, the self-employed, and those who are  unable to work as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak;  and benefit durations were extended by 13 weeks  through December. According to the CBO, around  $70 billion in the more generous weekly benefits had  been paid through the end of May. The legislation also  provides student loan and mortgage relief, suspending  loan payments and interest accrual on federal student  loans until the end of September and reducing or  suspending mortgage payments for mortgages backed  by government-sponsored enterprises.  Another  component of the legislation provides federally  mandated paid sick leave for workers at employers with fewer than 500 employees. The cost of the sick leave  is rebated to employers through refundable payroll tax  credits, which are expected to total about $90 billion in  fi scal 2020. Employees are entitled to up to two weeks  of paid leave equal to normal earnings for employees or  family members who are directly affected by COVID-19  or COVID-19-related closures; additionally, employees  are entitled to 10 weeks of paid leave at two-thirds  normal pay for those caring for a child whose school  or daycare is closed. In addition, about $90 billion in  tax relief was provided to households in fiscal 2020,  primarily through expanding the deductibility of certain  business losses from individual tax liabilities. Loans and Grants to Small Businesses:  $760 billion The Paycheck Protection Program provides about  $670 billion in support to businesses with fewer than  500 employees through loans of up to 250 percent  of monthly payroll costs before the crisis (subject to  a cap of $10 million). These loans will be forgiven if  employment and compensation are maintained relative  to a pre-crisis level. In addition, small businesses are  supported by about $90 billion in Small Business  Administration (SBA) Economic Injury Disaster Loans and by six-month loan payment deferrals for new and  existing SBA borrowers. Other Aid to Businesses: $420 billion Businesses are aided by several provisions that  reduce tax revenues in fiscal 2020, with the largest  reduction coming from delayed payment of employer side payroll taxes until 2021 and 2022, which is  expected to reduce tax payments by $210 billion in  fiscal 2020 but mostly be made up in subsequent  years. An additional roughly $90 billion reduction  in fiscal 2020 tax liability results from modifications  of the treatment of net operating losses and interest  expenses for corporations. The legislation also provides  nearly $50 billion in payroll tax relief for businesses  significantly affected by COVID-19 shutdowns in  order to retain employees. Aside from tax relief,  about $20 billion in loans and grants are expected  to go to passenger and cargo air carriers and related  contractors to support payroll expenses for aviation  workers affected by the pandemic. In addition, about  $50 billion in funds are expected to go to hospitals  to support health-care-related expenses or provide  relief for lost revenues. Finally, while they do not  show up in the CBO’s estimates of fiscal support, the  legislation provided up to $454 billion for the Treasury  Department to fund lending facilities established by  the Federal Reserve to offer loans to businesses as well  as state and local governments and provided up to  $46 billion to offer loans to the airline industry. Direct Government Purchases and Aid to  State and Local Governments: $260 billion The largest part of this aid category consists of  about $150 billion in relief funding to state and local  governments for expenses related to dealing with the  COVID-19 pandemic. State governments will also  receive an extra $30 billion through a temporary  increase in the share of Medicaid expenditures that  the federal government covers. In addition, the Federal  Emergency Management Agency is expected to spend  $50 billion in disaster relief funds to provide assistance  to individuals and organizations affected by the  COVID-19 crisis. Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis Small businesses employ nearly half of U.S. private sector workers, play key roles in local communities,  and provide income to millions of business owners.  The COVID-19 pandemic poses acute risks to the  survival of many small businesses. Widespread failure  of small businesses would create economic insecurity  for millions of workers and business owners, slow  down the economic recovery, and alter the economic  landscape of local communities. The Congress, the  Federal Reserve, and other federal agencies are making  aggressive efforts to support small businesses. More than 99 percent of U.S. fi rms have fewer than  500 employees, and almost 90 percent have fewer  than 20 employees. Altogether, businesses with fewer  than 500 employees account for almost half of private sector jobs.  Small businesses and small nonprofit  organizations are particularly prevalent in service  industries and include examples such as car dealers,  restaurants, barber shops, medical offices, legal offices,  home repair contractors, and religious organizations.  These businesses and organizations are part of the  economic and social landscape of local communities  and neighborhoods. Small businesses are also prevalent  in manufacturing supply chain industries.  Moreover,  the businesses that spur innovation, contribute to  nationwide job and productivity growth, and turn into  large household names typically start out as small  businesses. Small businesses are particularly vulnerable to social  distancing for two main reasons. First, small businesses  are prevalent in sectors that have seen especially large  declines in revenue due to social distancing; small  businesses make up about 60 percent of employment  in the “leisure and hospitality” sector and about  85 percent of employment in the “other services” sector  (which includes assorted neighborhood fixtures like  churches and beauty salons). Second, small fi rms tend  to be more financially constrained than larger fi rms.  For example, bank account data suggest that roughly  half of small businesses entered the COVID-19 crisis  with cash reserves sufficient for fewer than 15 days of  operations without revenue.  Moreover, even under  normal circumstances, many small fi rms face financial  challenges and lack access to liquid financial markets,  relying instead on bank loans, credit cards, and the  personal resources of owners. A wide variety of data reveal an alarming picture  of small business health during the COVID-19 crisis.  Surveys of small businesses suggest that pessimism  about business viability is prevalent.  The majority of  small businesses have seen revenue losses, and half of small businesses do not expect to return to their usual  level of operations within the next six months.7 Employment declines have been deeper among  small businesses than among larger businesses.  Moreover, the share of total job losses  accounted for by small businesses stopping paycheck  issuance entirely (that is, going inactive) is substantial.  Data from Homebase, a  provider of scheduling and time sheet services for small  local businesses, show that between 30 and 40 percent  of establishments in sectors deeply affected by social  distancing have gone inactive since February 15.9  Data  from Womply, a provider of credit card transaction  processing services, suggest that spending at small  restaurants was down 80 percent (versus a year earlier)  by early April and was still down 50 percent in early  June. Taken together, these data suggest considerable  risk of failure for a large number of small businesses. The inflow of new businesses (which are typically  small businesses) also plummeted. The Census Bureau reports that, in late March,  applications for new employer business tax identifiers  were down more than 40 percent relative to a year earlier; the series has only gradually recovered and  was still just below last year’s pace as of late May.  Business entry is a key contributor to job creation; with  business exits and associated job destruction likely to  be elevated during the COVID-19 episode, new fi rm  creation is even more important than usual. The Congress, the Federal Reserve, and other federal  agencies have acted swiftly to help address the risk  of widespread small business failure. As part of the  CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic  Security Act), the Congress created the Paycheck  Protection Program (PPP) to provide small businesses  with funds to retain employees for roughly two months.  The Federal Reserve is bolstering the effectiveness  of the PPP through the Paycheck Protection Program  Liquidity Facility, which extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans. About  three-fourths of small businesses with employees have  applied for PPP assistance, suggesting the program  is extremely valuable and timely, and a large share  of these applications have been approved; however,  some industries may face an ongoing need after the  program expires. The Federal Reserve is also supporting lending  to small businesses through the Term Asset-Backed  Securities Loan Facility, which lends to holders of,  among others, securities backed by loans guaranteed  by the Small Business Administration. In addition, the  Federal Reserve has established the Main Street Lending  Program (MSLP), which features a range of facilities  designed to provide support to small and medium-sized fi rms. Small businesses make vital contributions to labor  markets and their local communities, and a critical  subset of small businesses are young, innovative fi rms  with the potential to create many jobs and increase  overall productivity. The nature of the economic  recovery that follows the COVID-19 crisis will depend  in part on the survival of small businesses. Small  business failures not only destroy jobs, but also erase  the productive knowledge within the fi rms, deplete  the assets of business owners, alter the character of  communities and neighborhoods, and, in some cases,  deprive the country of innovations. The Federal Reserve  will continue to monitor the conditions of small  businesses and support this fundamental segment of  the economy. Developments Related to Financial Stability The COVID-19 pandemic has abruptly halted large  swaths of economic activity and led to swift financial  repercussions. Despite increased resilience from the  financial and regulatory reforms adopted since 2008,  financial system vulnerabilities—most notably those  associated with liquidity and maturity transformation  in the nonbank financial sector—have amplified some  of the economic effects of the pandemic. Accordingly,  financial-sector vulnerabilities are expected to be  significant in the near term. This discussion reviews  vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system at the  onset of the pandemic and describes some of the  extraordinary measures taken by the Federal Reserve to  mitigate the brunt of the shock. At the onset of the pandemic, asset valuation  pressures in the United States were elevated. Spreads,  risk premiums, and implied volatility were at the low  ends of their historical distributions among several  large asset categories, including domestic equities  and corporate bonds. Beginning in late February,  expectations for global economic growth plummeted  and uncertainty increased sharply, driving down  risky asset prices and putting downward pressure on  Treasury yields. Equity prices plunged as concern over  the COVID-19 outbreak grew and volatility surged to  extreme levels. Trading conditions became impaired  across several markets, posing significant challenges  to price discovery and increasing trading costs.  yields on corporate bonds over comparable-maturity  Treasury securities widened to the highest levels since  the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Leveraged loan  spreads also widened, especially for lower-rated loans.  Since late March, however, investors’ tolerance for  risk increased somewhat following interventions by  the Federal Reserve; subsequently, risky asset prices  partially retraced their course and market functioning  improved. While the data on real estate prices mostly  predate the COVID-19 outbreak, commercial real  estate markets, in particular, had elevated valuation  pressures at the beginning of 2020, making them  vulnerable to significant price declines stemming from  the unfolding effects of the pandemic. On the eve of the pandemic, vulnerabilities  associated with total private-sector debt stood at  a moderate level relative to their historical norms.  However, this assessment masks differences across the  business and household sectors. Household borrowing  advanced more slowly than overall economic activity  and remained heavily concentrated among borrowers  with high credit scores. By contrast, business debt levels were high relative to either business assets  or gross domestic product, with the riskiest fi rms  accounting for most of the increase in debt in recent  years. Against this backdrop, the COVID-19 outbreak  poses severe risks to businesses and millions of  households. For businesses, as economic activity  continues to contract, the related reduction in earnings  and additional debt needed to bridge the downturn  will increase the debt burden and default risk. For  households, the sudden and outsized increase in  unemployment and sharp decline in family incomes  may give rise to widespread delinquencies and defaults. In the financial sector, banks, as of the fourth quarter  of 2019, were well capitalized relative to historical  levels, in part due to the regulatory reforms enacted  after the GFC. To date, banks have been able to meet  surging demand for draws on credit lines while also  building loan loss reserves to absorb higher expected  defaults. Leverage at broker-dealers changed little in  the second half of 2019 and remained at historically  low levels. However, in March, constraints on dealers’  intermediation capacity, including internal risk management practices and regulatory constraints on  the bank holding companies under which many dealers  operate, were cited as possible reasons for deteriorating  liquidity in even usually liquid markets. Leverage at  life insurance companies has reached post-2008 highs.  Moreover, the capitalization of the life insurance sector  is likely to deteriorate in coming quarters because  of lower-than-expected asset valuations and lower  long-term interest rates. Some measures suggest that  hedge fund leverage continued to expand through  the end of 2019. Higher leverage left hedge funds  vulnerable to asset price declines and to the increase in  market volatility accompanying the COVID-19 shock.  The subsequent deleveraging by hedge funds likely  contributed to market dislocations in February  and March. Funding markets proved less fragile than during  the 2007–09 episode in the face of the COVID-19  outbreak and the associated financial market turmoil.  The subdued reliance of large bank holding companies  on short-term funding and their robust holdings of high quality liquid assets have prevented any considerable  stress in the banking sector. Nonetheless, significant  strains emerged and emergency Federal Reserve  actions were required to stabilize short-term funding  markets. Recent growth in prime money market mutual  funds (MMFs) and large holdings of corporate debt by other mutual funds increased the vulnerabilities in  the financial system. These vulnerabilities produced  considerable strains in March as asset prices fell and  investors became more risk averse. Prime MMFs and  bond mutual funds experienced significant outflows  in March, leading to severe strains in markets funded  by these institutions—notably, commercial paper (CP)  and corporate bond markets. The tensions began to  ease only after the Federal Reserve took several actions  targeted at these markets, as will be discussed. The outlook for the pandemic and economic activity  is uncertain. In the near term, risks associated with  the course of COVID-19 and its effects on the U.S.  and global economies remain high. In addition, there  is potential for stresses to interact with preexisting  vulnerabilities stemming from financial system or fiscal  weaknesses in Europe, China, and emerging market  economies. In turn, these risks have the potential  to interact with the vulnerabilities identified in this  discussion and produce additional strains for the U.S.  financial system. Facilities to Support the Economy since the  COVID-19 Outbreak The Federal Reserve, with the approval of the  Secretary of the Treasury, established new credit and  liquidity facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal  Reserve Act to alleviate severe dislocations that arose in  a number of financial markets and to support the flow  of credit to households and businesses.  These actions  fall into two categories: stabilizing short-term funding  markets and providing more direct support for the  extension of credit across the economy. As investors moved rapidly toward cash and the  most liquid assets, an acute liquidity squeeze emerged  in short-term funding markets in mid-March. In the  CP market, funding dried up even for companies in  good financial standing. At the same time, investors  contributed to the stress by starting to pull away from  some prime MMFs, which typically hold CP and other  highly liquid, short-term debt instruments. In response,  the Federal Reserve set up the Commercial Paper  Funding Facility, for which the Treasury Department has  provided $10 billion of credit protection. In addition, the Federal Reserve established the Money Market  Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), for which the  Treasury Department will provide up to $10 billion of  credit protection. The Federal Reserve established a  companion facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility,  to provide loans against high-quality collateral to  primary dealers that are critical intermediaries in short-term funding markets. The announcement of these  facilities strongly affected the targeted markets. After  an initial wave of borrowing from the facilities, market  strains eased and the use of these facilities has abated. To provide more direct support for credit across  the economy, the Federal Reserve established a  number of facilities in March and April. The Treasury’s  equity investments in many of these facilities were  authorized by the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief,  and Economic Security Act). Together, these facilities  will support the flow of up to $2.6 trillion of credit to  large employers, small and medium-sized businesses,  households, and state and local governments. The  Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF)  and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility  (SMCCF) were established to support employment  and spending of large, investment-grade businesses.  Following the announcement of the PMCCF and the  SMCCF, spreads of both investment- and speculative grade corporate bonds declined notably, and issuance  of investment-grade corporate bonds strengthened. To  support the longer-term, market-based financing that is  critical to real economic activity, the Federal Reserve  reestablished the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan  Facility to purchase securities backed by auto loans,  equipment leases, credit card loans, and other lending.  The Municipal Liquidity Facility was set up to help  U.S. state and local governments manage cash flow  pressures by providing credit secured through their  short-term obligations. The Federal Reserve established  the Main Street Lending Program to provide up to  $600 billion in four-year loans for small and medium-sized businesses that were in good financial standing  before the pandemic. Finally, the Paycheck Protection  Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) was established to  bolster the effectiveness of the Paycheck Protection  Program (PPP) of the Small Business Administration.  The CARES Act created the PPP program to provide  loans that can help small businesses keep their workers  on payrolls. The PPPLF extends credit to eligible  financial institutions to fi nance PPP loans, taking the  loans as collateral. The Federal Reserve is deeply committed to  transparency and recognizes that the need for  transparency is heightened when it is called upon  to use its emergency powers. Transparency helps  promote the accountability of the Federal Reserve to  the Congress and the public. Specifically, the Board  of Governors will report substantial amounts of  information on a monthly basis for the liquidity and  lending facilities using CARES Act funding as well  as for the PPPLF, including the names and details of  participants in each facility; amounts borrowed and  interest rate charged; and overall costs, revenues, and  fees for each facility. For the few programs that are  targeting financial mark et functioning, the Federal  Reserve will provide a full accounting of transactions  in these facilities. Real-time disclosure would risk  stigmatizing participation in these facilities and  undermining the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide  assurance that these systemically important markets  will continue their critical function in times of severe  market stress. The delay in disclosure will be no longer  than necessary to ensure that participants do not  hesitate to participate. While the facilities are operating,  the Federal Reserve will disclose extensive and regular  aggregate information on total borrowing, collateral  and fees, and interest income. Tools to Lessen Strains in Dollar  Funding Markets The Federal Reserve has taken actions to help  maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and  businesses by reducing financial stresses abroad, which  can spill over into U.S. credit markets. The Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity swap lines improve liquidity  conditions in dollar funding markets in the United  States and abroad by providing foreign central banks  with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to  institutions in their jurisdictions during times of market  stress. These swap lines provide U.S. dollars to a foreign  central bank in exchange for the equivalent amount  of funds in that central bank’s currency based on the  market exchange rate at the time of the transaction. The  Federal Reserve and each participating foreign central  bank agree to swap back the same quantities of their  two currencies at a specified date in the future. During  the week of March 15, 2020, the network of swap lines  was expanded and enhanced by adding additional  central bank counterparties, lowering the price on the  lines, and increasing the frequency and maturity of  dollar operations. In addition to the swap line enhancements, on  March 31, the Federal Reserve announced a new  program to support dollar funding markets, the  temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary  Authorities) Repo Facility. This facility should help  support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury  market by providing a temporary source of U.S. dollars  to a broad range of countries, many of which do not  have swap line arrangements with the Federal Reserve.  Under this facility, FIMA account holders can enter  into overnight repurchase agreements (repos) with the  Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S. Treasury  securities they hold at the Federal Reserve for U.S.  dollars. The repos are overnight but can be rolled over  as needed. The facility reduces the need for central  banks to sell their Treasury securities outright, thus helping to avoid disruptions to the Treasury market and  upward pressure on yields. Since its inception, take-up  at the facility has been modest. Regulatory and Supervisory Actions to  Support the Economy since the COVID-19  Outbreak The Federal Reserve has also made several  adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory regime  to facilitate market functioning and reduce regulatory  impediments to banks supporting households,  businesses, and municipal customers affected by  COVID-19. These actions fall into the following four  categories: 1. acceleration of previously planned, permanent  adjustments to certain regulatory requirements  to address specific impediments to market  functioning 2. provision of additional time for banking  organizations to phase in new regulatory  requirements 3. temporary relaxation of certain regulatory  requirements or requirements imposing  supervisory burden 4. supervisory statements encouraging banks to  support those affected by COVID-19  The first category includes changing the def nition  of eligible retained income to ensure capital and total  loss-absorbing capacity buffers function as intended;  allowing early adoption of a new method for certain  banking organizations to measure counterparty credit risk derivatives contracts; reducing reserve requirement  ratios to zero; and amending Regulation D (Reserve  Requirements of Depository Institutions) to delete the  six-per-month limit on convenience transfers from  the “savings deposit” definition. The second category  includes allowing certain banking organizations  additional time to delay the effects of the Current  Expected Credit Losses accounting standard in their  regulatory capital and extending the initial compliance  with the Single-Counterparty Credit Limit rule by  18 months. The third category includes excluding  Treasury securities and reserves from the supplementary  leverage ratio denominator; modifying the liquidity  and capital rules to allow banking organizations to  neutralize the regulatory effects of participating in the  PPPLF and MMLF programs; introducing a change to  support the favorable treatment of term primary credit  loans from the discount window under the liquidity  rules; providing temporary waivers to banks for limits  on transactions with nonbank affiliates that offer  credit and intermediation; temporarily lowering the  community bank leverage ratio to 8 percent; giving  banks flexibility in the timing of regulatory reports; and  granting mortgage servicers flexibility to work with  struggling consumers affected by COVID-19. Finally,  the fourth category includes encouraging banks to use  their capital and liquidity buffers to work constructively  with borrowers and to make short-term loan  modifications on a good faith basis, as well as  encouraging lenders to offer responsible small-dollar  loans to consumers and small businesses and to support  low- and moderate-income borrowers through loans  and banking fee waivers. Policy Response to COVID-19 in Foreign Economies Authorities in foreign economies have announced a  wide array of fiscal, monetary, and regulatory measures  to mitigate disruptions caused by the COVID-19  pandemic. Many foreign governments have enacted sizable  fiscal packages to address the sudden loss of income by  fi rms and households, with a special focus on the most  vulnerable groups, such as low-income individuals, the  unemployed, and small and medium-sized enterprises.  The size of the support is, on average, considerably  larger in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) than in  emerging market economies (EMEs), as many EME  governments have more limited fiscal space. The measures targeted at fi rms aim to keep them  afloat in the near term, with the hope of preserving  businesses until demand returns. Such measures  include loans at favorable terms and loan guarantees;  deferrals of taxes and social security contributions;  tax breaks and cash transfers, especially for small  and medium-sized enterprises; and targeted  sectoral support. For households, the measures aim  to provide income to those in need and alleviate  payment difficulties. These policies include increased  unemployment and pension payments, mortgage  deferrals, accelerated transfer payments, and direct  cash payments. In addition, several AFEs and some  Asian emerging economies have adopted large direct  wage subsidies to keep workers on fi rms’ payrolls.  Such measures may help limit dislocations in the labor  markets of these countries by subsidizing a significant  reduction in hours worked. The hope of these programs  is that workers’ continued attachment to their fi rms will  preserve human capital and make it readily available to  the fi rms during the recovery that follows the crisis. Many central banks have reduced their policy  rates—often to or near their effective lower  bounds—and have taken substantial actions to start  or expand asset purchases and to support the flow of  credit. Although central banks acted quickly to lower  interest rates, some policymakers in the EMEs expressed  concerns about intensifying capital outflows, while a few AFE central banks worried about the potential harm  to banks’ financial health. Several AFE central banks have purchased  government debt in response to the crisis. These  purchases have been primarily aimed at restoring  market functioning and providing liquidity, but the  purchases have also eased financial conditions by  lowering long-term yields. The Bank of England  (BOE) restarted its purchases of gilts, and the Swedish  Riks bank increased the pace of its existing program.  The European Central Bank (ECB) and the Reserve  Bank of New Zealand introduced and expanded asset  purchase programs. The Reserve Bank of Australia  (RBA) began bond purchases to target the three-year government bond yield at 0.25 percent, the same as its  overnight rate. Some central banks, such as the Bank  of Canada (BOC) and the RBA, have started purchases  of provincial and state bonds to support liquidity in  those markets. To ensure the smooth transmission of  its monetary actions, the ECB has used its flexibility  to weight its purchases more heavily toward bonds of  euro-area member states that face higher yields. Monetary authorities have also adopted policies  to sustain the provision of credit to businesses and  households during the pandemic. Central banks have  purchased a variety of private assets, thus directly  addressing distress in funding markets and helping  ease financial conditions for fi rms. These assets include  corporate bonds purchased by the BOE, ECB, and Bank  of Japan (BOJ); commercial paper bought by the BOC,  BOE, BOJ, and Riks bank; and exchange-traded funds  and real estate investment trusts purchased by the BOJ.  These actions have significantly expanded the balance  sheets of major foreign central banks. Some  central banks in EMEs have also begun purchasing  private assets, with the central banks of Chile and  Colombia buying bank bonds. Several central banks have also activated funding for-lending facilities to provide relatively inexpensive  funding to banks as long as they maintain defined  lending benchmarks, in some cases with extra  incentives to lend to small and medium-sized  enterprises. The BOE, BOJ, ECB, RBA, Riks bank, and  Bank of Korea currently have such programs. Regulators in a number of foreign economies  have introduced various measures that provide relief  for banks to help sustain their capacity to absorb  pandemic-related losses while continuing to lend to  the economy. These measures include temporarily  easing capital requirements, such as the reduction— and, in some cases, elimination—of conservation  and countercyclical capital buffers; deferring  the implementation of new, stricter Basel capital  requirements; temporarily easing liquidity requirements (for example, in France, Germany, and the United  Kingdom); and giving banks and their supervisors  more flexibility in dealing with nonperforming loans  (for example, the ECB). In addition, some regulators  have temporarily excluded central bank reserves and  certain safe assets from the calculation of leverage  exposures. Some foreign regulators are considering the  reduction or even elimination of risk weights on new  loans guaranteed by the government. Regulators also  emphasize that banks should continue to apply sound  underwriting standards and conduct solid capital and  liquidity planning and robust risk management. Federal Reserve Actions to Ensure Smooth Functioning of Treasury and MBS Markets Deterioration in Market Functioning in  February and March Between late February and early March, functioning  in U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets became increasingly  strained. Amid growing concerns about the economic  implications of COVID-19, investors sought to sell large  volumes of long-maturity Treasury securities and MBS  and reallocate their portfolios into shorter-term, more  liquid assets. While the yields on long-maturity Treasury  securities initially dropped sharply, in mid-March they  started to increase in the face of these strong selling  pressures. Around the same time as the  increase in long-maturity Treasury yields, the spreads  between yields on MBS and Treasury securities of  comparable duration widened sharply. Indications of  severe dislocations in both markets were also present.  For example, bid-ask spreads for Treasury securities  and agency MBS widened significantly. One factor that may explain these market  dislocations is the effect of widespread selling of  Treasury securities and MBS to primary dealers, who  intermediate a large proportion of trading in these  markets. As a wide range of domestic and foreign  investors (including foreign official investors) rushed  to raise cash or rebalance their portfolios by selling  assets, dealers took large amounts of less liquid securities, including off-the-run Treasury securities  and agency MBS, onto their balance sheets. At  the same time, mortgage refinancing picked up,  prompting substantial turnover in the MBS market.  By early March, some dealers had reportedly run  into balance sheet constraints that hampered their  ability to purchase additional securities, leading to a  deterioration in the functioning of a number of dealer-intermediated markets. In the market for Treasury securities, liquidity  conditions were particularly poor for more seasoned, or  “off the run,” securities. However, the most liquid parts  of the market, where newly issued, or “on the run,”  securities are traded electronically, saw unprecedented  strains: The volume of posted quotes, or “market  depth,” dropped sharply, while intraday bid-ask spreads  were exceptionally volatile, particularly for the longest maturity securities. These strains in the most liquid part  of the market suggest that principal trading fi rms— market participants who specialize in high-frequency  and automated intermediation—were significantly less  active than usual. Federal Reserve Policy Actions The disruptions to the functioning of the Treasury  and MBS markets were notable in view of the status of these markets as cornerstones for the operation  of the U.S. and global financial systems and for the  transmission of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve  therefore took a series of policy measures designed  to ensure the smooth functioning of these markets.  These measures included the expansion of repurchase  operations, an increase in purchases of Treasury and  agency MBS securities, the expansion of financing  arrangements for primary dealers, and a temporary  change to the regulatory capital requirements of bank  holding companies and depository institutions. Beginning March 9, 2020, following a directive  from the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the  Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Open Market Desk  increased the size of overnight and term repurchase  operations in order to ensure that the supply of reserves  remained ample and to support the smooth functioning  of the markets in which primary dealers obtain a  substantial proportion of their short-term funding. These changes expanded the supply of short-term  funding available to primary dealers to fi nance their  increased holdings of Treasury securities and agency  MBS at a time when funding costs from other sources  were increasing. Further, on March 12, the Desk  introduced new weekly recurring one- and three-month  term repurchase agreement (repo) operations of up  to $500 billion to address the disruption in Treasury  financing markets.  Finally, on March 16, the Desk  introduced a second daily overnight repo operation and  increased the amount offered in each to $500 billion. Usage of Federal Reserve repo operations peaked on  March 17, with overnight and term repo outstanding  of $496 billion, and has since fallen to $167 billion  as funding strains have eased. In light of more stable  repo market conditions, on May 4, the Desk returned  to once daily overnight repo operations.  Further, on  May 14, the Desk discontinued its three-month term  repo operations. Despite the much larger volume of repo operations  during the week of March 9, strains in Treasury and  agency MBS markets continued to build. Beginning in  mid-March, therefore, the FOMC directed the Desk to  purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS in order  to support smooth market functioning. On March 15,  the FOMC directed the Desk to increase its holdings  of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and of  agency MBS by at least $200 billion, with purchases  to take place across maturities.  To provide greater  flexibility in addressing the strains, on March 23,  the FOMC authorized purchases of these securities  in the amounts needed to support smooth market  functioning and effective transmission of monetary  policy to broader financial conditions. The securities  targeted for purchase were also expanded to include  agency commercial MBS. Since mid-March, the  Desk has purchased approximately $1.6 trillion and  $719 billion of Treasury securities and agency MBS,  respectively.  The daily amounts of purchases peaked at  approximately $75 billion and $41 billion for Treasury  securities and agency MBS, respectively, in late March  before being reduced in stages to the current average  daily amounts of around $4.0 billion for Treasury  securities and $4.5 billion for agency MBS (including  reinvestments). These purchases helped reduce  financial market volatility by providing a predictable  source of demand for these securities and by taking up  some of the inventories from dealers’ balance sheets. On March 17, the Board, with the approval of the  U.S. Treasury Secretary, established the Primary Dealer  Credit Facility (PDCF) to provide primary dealers  with access to term funding against a broad range of  collateral.  The PDCF helped alleviate funding pressures  faced by primary dealers by allowing them to source  financing more easily for their increased securities  holdings. The amount of PDCF loans outstanding  peaked at around $35 billion in mid-April but has since  declined to around $6 billion. On March 31, the Federal Reserve announced the  establishment of the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility to  allow FIMA account holders, which consist of central  banks and other international monetary authorities  with accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New  York, to exchange their Treasury securities for U.S.  dollars.  This facility allows foreign official institutions  to raise U.S. dollars, if needed, without having to sell  Treasury securities in the open market during periods  of heightened volatility or impaired market functioning.  Since its inception, take-up of the facility has been  modest, as stresses in the U.S. Treasury market have  declined. On April 1, the Federal Reserve released an interim  final rule indicating that holdings of U.S. Treasury  securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks by  bank holding companies would be excluded from the  calculation of the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR)  until March 31, 2021.10 Further, on May 15, 2020,  the federal bank regulatory agencies (the Board of  Governors, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,  and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) released  an interim final rule allowing depository institutions  that are subject to the SLR the option to similarly  exclude U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal  Reserve Banks from their SLR calculations through  March 31, 2021.11 These temporary exemptions are  expected to ease liquidity pressures for primary dealers  and depository institutions subject to these leverage  ratios by providing them with greater flexibility to  intermediate trades with clients in the presence of  temporarily larger inventories of Treasury securities. Improvements in Market Functioning Since the announcement of these policy actions,  trading conditions in the markets for Treasury securities  and MBS have improved steadily. The purchases of  Treasury securities and agency MBS contributed to  the subsequent decline in primary dealers’ inventories.  Bid-ask spreads have narrowed, particularly  in the case of on-the-run Treasury securities, while MBS  spreads have also come down from their peaks in mid-March. In addition to the Federal Reserve’s actions, the  passage of the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Re lief, and  Economic Security Act), together with an improvement  in sentiment among investors regarding the economic  implications of COVID-19, likely contributed to the  improvement in market functioning. In late May, these  inventories temporarily increased to levels previously  seen in March, largely because of increased dealer  holdings of Treasury bills. However, Treasury markets  did not exhibit a recurrence of the notable strains in  trading conditions witnessed earlier this year. Although trading conditions have improved  substantially since mid-March, bid-ask spreads for  longer-maturity and off-the-run Treasury securities  remain wider than in mid-February. Market depth  for on-the-run securities remains low, particularly for  longer-maturity securities. MBS market functioning and  liquidity have largely returned to pre-February norms,  though strains remain in some less liquid parts of  the market. Developments on the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet The Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance  Sheet Has Increased Considerably In response to the financial and economic  disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the  Federal Reserve has eased the stance of monetary  policy and has deployed various tools to promote  smooth functioning of financial markets and the fl ow  of credit to households and businesses. This discussion  reviews the implications of these actions for the Federal  Reserve’s balance sheet. To support the smooth functioning of those  credit markets that are critical for the economy, the  Federal Reserve purchased Treasury securities and  agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed  securities (MBS), expanded repurchase agreement  (repo) operations, and introduced several credit and  liquidity facilities. As a result of these actions, the size  of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased from  $4.2 trillion at the beginning of 2020, approximately  19 percent of U.S. nominal gross domestic product  (GDP), to $7.2 trillion in June 2020, approximately  33 percent of U.S. nominal GDP.  The $3 trillion increase  in the size of the balance sheet was driven by asset  purchases and other extraordinary actions.  Open Market Operations, the Discount  Window, and U.S. Dollar Liquidity Swap Lines Since the beginning of 2020, System Open Market  Account holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS increased by $1,805 billion and $427 billion, respectively.  The markets for both Treasury securities  and agency MBS play a critical role in the U.S.  economy, and the Federal Reserve’s purchases have  fostered a substantial improvement in the functioning of  these markets and the conditions prevailing in them. Furthermore, to address strains in short-term U.S.  dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York’s Open Market Desk expanded its offerings  of overnight and term repo operations. The amount  of repos outstanding reached a peak of $442 billion  in mid-March. Subsequently, given the improvement  in funding market conditions, the Desk announced  several reductions in the frequency of repo operations.  As of June 3, all repos outstanding had declined to  $212 billion, lower than the amount outstanding early  in the year, amid substantial increases in reserves and  improved funding market conditions. On March 15, the Federal Reserve announced  changes to the discount window and encouraged  depository institutions to use the discount window to  meet unexpected funding needs and support the fl ow  of credit to households and businesses.  The changes  include lowering the primary credit rate by 150 basis  points to 0.25 percent and extending borrowing terms  for up to 90 days. The total outstanding discount  window primary credit borrowing peaked at around  $51 billion in late March and has since declined  to $11 billion in June. Furthermore, the Federal  Reserve maintains standing dollar liquidity swap line  agreements with the central banks of several countries  and instituted temporary agreements with the central  banks of additional countries. After initially ramping up  to $439 billion in March and April, the total agreements  outstanding stayed mostly fl at in May to reach  $447 billion as of June 3. Lending Programs and Liquidity Facilities  under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act In addition to the open market operations and  initiatives described earlier, the Federal Reserve further  expanded measures to enhance liquidity and the fl ow  of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Under the  authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act,  with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, the  Federal Reserve Board implemented various measures  in response to intensified stresses in several markets. The combined size of the Money Market Mutual  Fund Liquidity Facility and the Primary Dealer Credit  Facility increased to $86 billion in April, but the size  of the facilities declined to $36 billion by June 3. The  combined size of other facilities, such as the Paycheck  Protection Program Lending Facility, the Commercial  Paper Funding Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate  Credit Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility,  has been steadily rising and reached $65 billion as of  June 3. The Expansion of Total Assets Led to Higher  Reserve Balances Held by Depository  Institutions The increase in the Federal Reserve’s assets led to  a commensurate increase in the size of liabilities on  the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The expansion  of total assets from the outright purchases and other actions resulted in reserve balances of $3.3 trillion, an  increase of $1.7 trillion from the beginning of the year.  Additionally, several non-reserve liabilities increased.  In March and April, Federal Reserve notes grew faster  than normal, partially in response to the COVID-19  pandemic, and reached $1.9 trillion, an increase of  $144 billion from the beginning of the year. Furthermore, the U.S. Treasury’s General Account  (TGA) at the Federal Reserve, which the Treasury uses  to receive taxes and proceeds of Treasury auctions  and to process the government’s outlays, increased  substantially. At the beginning of 2020, the TGA  balance was approximately $400 billion. In preparation  for the fiscal spending related to the CARES Act  (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act)  and other stimulus measures, the TGA balance reached  a high of $1.4 trillion on June 3. 