The labor market strengthened further last  year but at a slower pace than in 2018 . . .  Payroll employment gains were solid in the second half of 2019 and averaged 176,000 per month during the year as a whole. This  pace is somewhat slower than the average monthly gains in 2018, even accounting for the anticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ upcoming benchmark revision to payroll employment. However, the pace of job gains appears to have remained faster than what is needed to provide jobs for net new entrants to the labor force as the population grows. Reflecting the employment gains over this period, the unemployment rate declined further in 2019 and stood at 3.5 percent in December, 0.4 percentage point below its year earlier level and at its lowest level since 1969. In addition, the unemployment rate is 0.6 percentage point below the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. Strengthening labor market conditions are also evident in rising labor force participation rates (LFPRs)—that is, the shares of the population either working or actively seeking work. The LFPR for individuals aged 16 and over was 63.2 percent in December, above its level a year ago despite the downward pressure of about ¼ percentage point per year associated with the aging of the population. The LFPR for prime-age individuals (between 25 and 54 years old), which is much less sensitive to the effects of population aging, has been rising over the past few years and continued to increase in 2019. The employment to-population ratio for individuals aged 16 and over—that is, the share of people who are working—was 61.0 percent in December and has been increasing since 2011. Other indicators are also consistent with strong labor market conditions, albeit with some slowing in the pace of improvement since 2018. As reported in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), job openings have remained plentiful, although the private-sector job openings rate has come down over the past year. Similarly, the quits rate in the JOLTS has remained near the top of its historical range, an indication that workers are being bid away  from their current jobs or have become more confident that they can successfully switch jobs if they so wish. These data accord well with surveys of consumers that indicate households perceive jobs as plentiful. The JOLTS layoff rate and the number of people filing initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits— historically, a good early indicator of economic downturns—have both remained quite low.  . . . and unemployment rates have fallen, on net, for all major demographic groups over the past several years  Differences in unemployment rates across ethnic and racial groups have narrowed in recent years, on net, as they typically do during economic expansions, after having widened during the 2007–09 recession.  The decline in the unemployment rate for African Americans has been particularly sizable, and its average rate in the second half of October 2019 was the lowest recorded since the data began in 1972. Although the unemployment rates for African Americans  and for Hispanics remain substantially  above those for whites and for Asians, those  differentials in the second half of 2019 were  at their narrowest levels on record. The rise in  LFPRs for prime-age individuals over the past  few years has also been apparent in each of  these racial and ethnic groups.   Increases in labor compensation have  remained moderate by historical  standards . . .  Despite strong labor market conditions, the  available indicators generally suggest that  increases in hourly labor compensation have  remained moderate, averaging about 3 percent  over the past two years. These indicators  include the employment cost index, a measure  of both wages and the cost to employers of  providing benefits; compensation per hour in  the business sector, a broad-based but volatile  measure of wages, salaries, and benefits; and  average hourly earnings from the payroll  survey, a monthly index that is timely but  does not account for benefits. The  median 12-month wage growth of individuals  reporting to the Current Population Survey  calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank  of Atlanta, which tends to be higher than  broader-based measures of wage growth,  remains near the upper portion of its range  over the past couple of years. Interestingly,  wage growth over the past few years has been  strongest for workers in relatively low-paying  jobs, suggesting that the strong labor market  is having a more pronounced benefit for  these workers.  . . . and likely have been restrained by  slow growth in labor productivity over  much of the expansion  These moderate rates of hourly compensation  gains likely reflect the offsetting influences of  a strengthening labor market and productivity  growth that has been weak through much  of the expansion. From 2008 to 2018, labor  productivity increased a little more than  1 percent per year, on average, well below  the average pace from 1996 to 2007 of nearly  3 percent and also below the average gain  in the 1974–95 period. Although  considerable debate remains about the  reasons for the slowdown in productivity  growth over this period, the weakness may be  partly attributable to the sharp pullback in  capital investment, including on research and  development, during the most recent recession  and the relatively slow recovery that followed.  More recently, labor productivity is estimated  to have increased 1.5 percent over the four  quarters ending in 2019:Q3—a small  improvement from the preceding year,  especially given the volatility of the  productivity data, but still moderate relative to  earlier periods. While it is uncertain whether  productivity growth will continue to improve,  a sustained pickup in productivity growth, as  well as additional labor market strengthening,  would support stronger gains in labor  compensation.  Inflation was below 2 percent last year  After having been close to the FOMC’s  objective of 2 percent in 2018, inflation moved  back below 2 percent last year, where it has  been for most of the time since the end of the  most recent recession. The 12-month change  in the price index for personal consumption  expenditures (PCE) was 1.6 percent in  December 2019, as was the 12-month  measure of inflation that excludes food and  energy items (so-called core inflation), which  historically has been a better indicator of  where inflation will be in the future than the  overall index. Both measures are  down from the rates recorded a year ago;  the slowing partly results from particularly  low readings in the monthly price data in the  first quarter of 2019, which appear to reflect  idiosyncratic price declines in a number of  specific categories such as apparel, used cars,  banking services, and portfolio management  services. Indeed, core inflation picked up after  the first quarter and was at an average annual  rate of 1.9 percent over the remainder of  the year. The trimmed mean PCE price index,  calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of  Dallas, also suggests a transitory element to  inflation readings early last year. The trimmed  mean provides an alternative way to purge  inflation of transitory influences, and it is less  sensitive than the core index to idiosyncratic  price movements such as those noted earlier.5  The 12-month change in this measure was  about the same in December 2019 as it was  in 2018.  Oil prices fluctuated in 2019  After falling from more than $80 per barrel to  less than $60 per barrel in late 2018, the Brent  spot price of crude oil fluctuated between $60  and $70 for most of 2019. Prices generally  moved up in the second half of last year,  supported by expectations of supply cuts  in OPEC member countries and, later on,  diminished concerns about the global outlook. Prices also spiked briefly in early  January over tensions with Iran. In recent  weeks, however, oil prices moved lower amid  heightened fears that the coronavirus outbreak  that started in China might weigh on economic  growth and the demand for oil. Despite  these fluctuations in oil prices, retail gasoline  prices generally edged lower since mid-2019.  For 2019 as a whole, consumer energy prices  rose modestly more than the core index.  Meanwhile, food prices posted only a small  increase in 2019, held down by soft prices for  farm commodities, and contributed very little  to overall consumer price inflation.  Reported prices of imports other than  energy fell  Nonfuel import prices, before accounting for  the effects of tariffs on the price of imported  goods, have continued to decline from their  mid-2018 peak, responding to lower foreign  inflation and declines in non-oil commodity  prices. After declining in the  first half of 2019, prices of industrial metals  appear to have bottomed out in recent  months, consistent with increased optimism  about global demand following positive trade  developments.  Survey-based measures of inflation  expectations have been broadly stable . . .  Expectations of inflation likely influence actual  inflation by affecting wage- and price-setting  decisions. Survey-based measures of inflation  expectations at medium- and longer-term  horizons have remained broadly stable over  the past year. In the Survey of Professional  Forecasters, conducted by the Federal  Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median  expectation for the annual rate of increase in  the PCE price index over the next 10 years  has been very close to 2 percent for the past  several years. In the University of  Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the median  value for inflation expectations over the next  5 to 10 years has fluctuated within a narrow  range around 2½ percent since the end of  2016, though this level is between ¼ and  ½ percentage point lower than had prevailed  through 2014. In the Survey of Consumer  Expectations, conducted by the Federal  Reserve Bank of New York, the median of  respondents’ expected inflation rate three  years hence moved lower, on net, in the second  half of last year and averaged 2.5 percent,  ¼ percentage point below its average over the  preceding three years.  . . . and market-based measures of  inflation compensation have also been  little changed  Inflation expectations can also be gauged  by market-based measures of inflation  compensation. However, the inference  is not straightforward, because market based measures can be importantly affected  by changes in premiums that provide  compensation for bearing inflation and  liquidity risks. Measures of longer-term  inflation compensation—derived either from  differences between yields on nominal Treasury  securities and those on comparable-maturity  Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS)  or from inflation swaps—have been little  changed, on net, since the middle of 2019,  with both measures below their respective  ranges that persisted for most of the 10 years  before the start of notable declines in mid-2014. The TIPS-based measure of 5-to-  10-year-forward inflation compensation and  the analogous measure from inflation swaps  are now about 1¾ percent and 2 percent,  respectively.8  Growth of gross domestic product was  moderate in the second half of 2019 . . .  Real gross domestic product (GDP) is reported  to have increased at a moderate average  annual rate of 2.1 percent in the second half  of 2019, although growth was somewhat  slower than in the first half of the year and in  2018. Consumer spending rose at  a moderate pace, on average, and residential  investment turned up after having declined  since the end of 2017. In contrast, business  fixed investment declined in the second half  of last year, reflecting a number of factors  that likely include uncertainty regarding  trade tensions and the weak global growth  outlook. Those factors also continued to weigh  on manufacturing output, which declined  over the first half of 2019 and has moved  roughly sideways since then. (See the box  “Manufacturing and U.S. Business Cycles.”)  Despite those headwinds, the economic  expansion continues to be supported by steady  job gains, increases in household wealth,  expansionary fiscal policy, and supportive  domestic financial conditions that include  moderate borrowing costs and easy access to  credit for many households and businesses.  . . . and downside risks to the outlook  receded somewhat  Downside risks to the economic outlook  seem to have receded somewhat in the latter  part of 2019. Labor market conditions and  economic growth in the United States have  been resilient to the global headwinds in 2019,  and conflicts over trade policy diminished  somewhat toward the end of the year.  Economic growth abroad also shows signs of  stabilizing, though the coronavirus outbreak  presents a more recent risk. Reflecting these  factors as well as more accommodative  monetary policy stances in the United  States and some foreign economies, financial  conditions eased somewhat over the second  half of the year. Statistical models designed  to gauge the probability of recession using  various indicators, including the Treasury  yield curve, suggest that the likelihood of a  recession occurring over the next year has  fallen noticeably in recent months. Similarly,  as shown in Part 3, when Federal Reserve  policymakers most recently presented their  economic projections, in December, fewer  participants judged the risks to the outlook to  be tilted to the downside compared with their  projections from last June.  Ongoing improvements in the labor  market continue to support household  income and consumer spending  Consumer spending rose at a moderate pace,  on average, in the third and fourth quarters  of 2019 and posted another solid gain for the  year as a whole. The growth in real  PCE in recent years reflects the continued  Historically, the manufacturing sector in the United  States has been a source of economic strength and of  good jobs for workers at all levels of education. It is  also a highly cyclical sector that has tended to retrench  dramatically during economy-wide contractions and to  rebound sharply during expansions.  Concerns by some observers about a possible  economy-wide recession were prompted by declines  in the industrial production index for manufacturing  (IP) in the first two quarters of 2019, particularly when  viewed in conjunction with the stagnant manufacturing  growth that was occurring in many foreign economies.  Manufacturing output in the United States remained  weak through the end of the year. And, for  2019 as a whole, production decreased 1.3 percent,  with fairly broad-based declines across both durable  and nondurable goods industries. The slump in  manufacturing last year is attributable to several  factors, including trade developments, weak global  growth, softer business investment, lower oil prices  engendering a cutback in demand by drillers, and the  slower production of Boeing’s 737 Max aircraft due to  safety issues.  When considering the implications of these declines  in manufacturing production for the broader economy,  it is important to recognize that this weakness has likely  spilled over to other sectors. Manufacturing production  requires inputs from other industries, and goods  that are produced need to be transported and sold.  For example, a reduction in auto assemblies affects  automakers’ demand both for intermediate inputs like  steel and for business services like accounting. In turn,  the steelmakers need less iron ore, and the accountants  need less tech support. The input-output tables for the  U.S. economy imply that every dollar of factory output  requires 56 cents of input from other domestic sectors.  Manufacturing currently accounts for 12 percent of  gross domestic product (GDP), so its 2019 decline  of 1.3 percent would have directly subtracted about  0.15 percent from GDP; including inputs purchased  from upstream sectors, the drag is a bit more  than 0.2 percent. After adding in the downstream  activities needed to bring products to market (such as  transportation, wholesaling, and retailing), last year’s  decline in manufacturing likely reduced GDP by less  than 0.5 percent—not enough to tip an otherwise expanding economy into recession.  That modest effect partly reflects the decline in  manufacturing’s share of the U.S. economy since the  middle of the 20th century. Manufacturing employment  has dropped from about 30 percent of total employment  to less than 9 percent today, and the value added from  manufacturing has fallen from more than 25 percent  of GDP to a bit under 12 percent. However,  although the manufacturing sector has shrunk, factory  output may still be a good barometer of aggregate  demand and of the economy’s health.  Growth in the U.S. manufacturing sector has slowed  considerably over time. Measured from business  cycle peak to business cycle peak, output grew about  3.5 percent per year between 1920 and 1960, as well  as from 1960 through 2001. As seen in figure C, factory  production has moved up only about 0.5 percent per  year since 2001, and only 2 of those 19 calendar years  recorded gains of more than 3.5 percent.  To interpret the recent weakness in manufacturing  in this light, figure D shows 12-month changes in  “detrended” IP, where values below zero indicate  year-over-year changes in IP that are slower than its  trend at the time. Notably, most expansions include  periods of modest below-trend growth. In 2019, growth  averaged about 2 percentage points below trend, a  slowdown fairly similar to that in the 2015–16 period.  Other episodes of modest below-trend growth appear  in the expansions of the early 2000s, the 1990s, the  mid-1980s, and the 1960s. In contrast, as shown by the  red line in figure D, every recession since 1960—but  no expansion—includes at least some months when the  12-month change in IP was at least 7 percentage points  below trend. The available data, however, suggest that  the recent experience in the United States falls well  short of that threshold. improvements in the labor market, which  have supported further increases in household  income. Real disposable personal income, a  measure of households’ after-tax purchasing  power, increased 2.6 percent in 2019, a solid  gain albeit below the robust increase in 2018  that was bolstered by a reduction in personal  income taxes. The personal saving rate, at  7.7 percent in the fourth quarter, was little  changed from the previous year.  Spending was also supported by high  household wealth . . .  The relatively high level of aggregate  household net worth also supported consumer  spending last year. House prices, which are  of particular importance for the value of  assets held by a large portion of households,  continued to increase in 2019, although at  a more moderate pace than in recent years. In addition, U.S. equity prices,  which fell sharply at the end of 2018, have  rebounded since then. Equity wealth is more  concentrated among high-wealth households  with high propensities to save than is housing  wealth, however, and may therefore provide  less support for consumption. The ratio of  aggregate household net worth to household  income held steady through the third quarter  of last year at 6.9, near its all-time high.  . . . and consumer sentiment  remains strong  Consumers have remained upbeat during the  past year. The Michigan index of consumer  sentiment, which declined last summer as  trade tensions spiked, recovered in recent  months and currently stands at a high level by  historical standards. The sentiment measure  from the Conference Board, which has been  more stable, also suggests consumers are fairly  upbeat.  Borrowing conditions for households  remain generally favorable, and  borrowing costs have moved down since  the middle of 2019 . . .  Financing conditions for consumers remain  supportive of growth in household spending.  Interest rates on credit cards and auto loans  declined, on net, during the second half  of 2019, and consumer credit continued  to expand at a moderate pace.  Standards and delinquency rates for these  loans have been generally stable. For student  loans, credit remains widely available, with  over 90 percent of such credit being extended  by the federal government. After peaking in  2013, delinquencies on such loans have been  gradually declining, reflecting in part the  continued improvements in the labor market.  In the mortgage market, credit has continued  to be readily available for households with  solid credit profiles but remains noticeably  tighter than before the most recent recession  for borrowers with low credit scores.  . . . and activity in the housing sector  has picked up, likely reflecting lower  interest rates  Residential investment picked up in the second  half of 2019 after declining for six straight  quarters. Housing starts for single-family and  multifamily housing units increased sharply  in the second half of last year and posted  appreciable gains for the year as a whole, with  starts and permits for new construction rising  to the highest levels in more than 10 years. Sales of new and existing homes  also increased during 2019. This  improvement appears to have importantly  reflected the reduction in mortgage interest  rates; after increasing appreciably from mid-  2017 through 2018, rates declined markedly  last year, fully reversing those earlier increases. Despite the lower mortgage rates,  households’ perceptions of homebuying  conditions have remained low, likely reflecting  ongoing increases in housing prices. In contrast, business fixed investment  weakened in the second half of 2019 . . .  After increasing more than 5 percent per year  in 2017 and 2018, business fixed investment—  spending by businesses on structures,  equipment, and intangibles such as research  and development—stalled in 2019, as a  moderate gain in the first quarter was offset  by small declines over the rest of the year. The  softness in business investment last year was  evident in each of the three main components,  and a portion of the weakening appears to  reflect concerns over trade policy and slower  foreign growth; other factors included the  suspension of deliveries of the Boeing 737  Max aircraft and the continued decline in  drilling and mining structures investment  amid oil prices that fell back from the levels  reached in 2018. Forward-looking indicators  of business spending—such as orders of  capital goods, surveys of business conditions  and sentiment, and profit expectations from  industry analysts—all appear to have stabilized  in recent months but suggest that investment is  likely to remain subdued.  . . . despite corporate financing conditions  that remained accommodative overall  Financing conditions for nonfinancial  firms have remained accommodative amid  lower interest rates. Flows of credit to large  nonfinancial firms remained solid overall in  the third quarter of 2019. The  gross issuance of corporate bonds, although  lower than in the first half of last year, was  robust across credit categories. Yields on both  investment- and speculative-grade corporate  bonds continued to decrease and are near  historical lows. Spreads on corporate bond  yields over comparable-maturity Treasury  securities have continued to narrow, on net,  since the middle of last year and are at the  lower end of their historical distributions.  Respondents to the January Senior Loan  Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending  Practices, or SLOOS, reported that banks  eased several terms on commercial and  industrial (C&I) loans but that demand for  C&I loans has continued to weaken, consistent  with the slowdown in business investment.  C&I loan growth at banks has slowed since  the first half of last year, while commercial  real estate loan growth has continued to be  strong. Meanwhile, financing conditions for  small businesses have remained generally  accommodative, but credit growth has been  subdued.  Net exports added to GDP growth in  2019, as exports grew little but imports  declined  Real exports grew only a touch in 2019, as  tariffs on U.S. exports increased and foreign  growth weakened. Real imports  declined last year, in part reflecting higher  tariffs on imported goods and weakness in  investment and manufacturing. As a result,  real net exports—after having subtracted from  U.S. real GDP growth in 2018—provided a  modest boost to GDP growth in 2019. Relative  to 2018, the nominal trade deficit is slightly  less negative, and the current account deficit is  little changed as a percent of GDP.  Federal fiscal policy actions continued  to boost economic growth in 2019  while raising the federal unified budget  deficit . . .  The effects of fiscal policy actions enacted  at the federal level in earlier years continued  to boost GDP growth in 2019; the Tax Cuts  and Jobs Act of 2017 lowered personal  and business income taxes, and rising  appropriations consistent with the Bipartisan  Budget Act of 2018 boosted federal  purchases. In 2019, federal purchases rose  4.3 percent, well above the 2.7 percent increase  of 2018.  The federal unified budget deficit widened  further in fiscal year 2019 to 4½ percent of  nominal GDP from 3¾ percent of GDP in  2018, as expenditures moved up as a share of  the economy while receipts moved sideways. Expenditures, at 21 percent of  GDP, are above the level that prevailed in  the decade before the start of the 2007–09  recession, while receipts have continued to run  below their average levels. The ratio of federal  debt held by the public to nominal GDP rose  to 79 percent in fiscal 2019 and was quite  elevated relative to historical norms.  The Congressional Budget Office projects that  this ratio will rise further over the next several  years, reflecting large and rising deficits under  current fiscal policy.  . . . and the fiscal position of most state  and local governments is stable  The fiscal position of most state and local  governments remains stable, although  there is a range of experiences across these  governments. Revenues for these governments  have continued to grow in recent quarters, as  the economic expansion pushes up income  and sales tax collections for state governments,  and past house price gains continue to  push up property tax collections for local  governments. Boosted by a rebound in  construction spending following two years of  weak growth, real purchases by state and local  governments rose moderately last year but still  remained quite restrained, partly reflecting  budget pressures associated with pension and  retiree health-care obligations. State and local  government payrolls increased moderately in  2019 but have only roughly regained the peak  observed before the current expansion, and  real outlays for construction are more than  10 percent below their pre-recession peak.  The debt of these governments as a share of  the economy has continued to edge lower and  currently equals around 14 percent of GDP,  well below the previous peak of 21 percent  following the most recent recession. The expected path of the federal funds rate  over the next several years shifted down  Market-based measures of the expected  path of the federal funds rate over the next  several years have moved down, on net, since  the middle of last year and show about a  30 basis point decrease in the federal funds  rate over 2020 and a relatively flat path  thereafter. Survey-based measures  of the expected path of the policy rate also  shifted down from the levels observed in the  middle of 2019 but indicate no change to  the target range for the federal funds rate  over 2020 from its level at the end of 2019.  According to the results of the most recent  Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of  Market Participants, both conducted by  the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in  December, the median of respondents’ modal  projections implies a flat trajectory for the  target range of the federal funds rate for the  next few years. Additionally, market-based  measures of uncertainty about the policy  rate approximately one to two years ahead  declined, on balance, from their levels at the  end of last June and are close to their average  level in recent years.  U.S. nominal Treasury yields decreased  on net  After moving significantly lower over the first  half of 2019, nominal Treasury yields also  fell sharply in August, largely in response to  investors’ concerns regarding trade tensions  between the United States and China and the  global economic outlook. Later in  the year, as these concerns abated, Treasury  yields rose, the yield curve steepened, and  uncertainty about near-term Treasury yields—  measured by option-implied volatility on  short- and longer-dated swap rates—declined.  However, in the second half of January,  investors’ concerns about the implications of  the coronavirus outbreak for the economic  outlook weighed on Treasury yields and led  to a flattening of the yield curve as well as  some increase in uncertainty about near-term  Treasury yields. Since the middle of last year,  Treasury yields ended lower on net.  Consistent with changes in the yields on  nominal Treasury securities, yields on 30-year  agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)—an  important determinant of mortgage interest  rates—decreased, on balance, since the middle  of last year and remained low by historical  standards. Meanwhile, yields  on both investment- and speculative-grade  corporate bonds continued to decline and also  stayed low by historical standards.  Spreads on corporate bond yields over  comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed  moderately, on net, over the second half of  2019 and remained in the lower end of their  historical distribution.  Broad equity price indexes increased notably  Equity prices fluctuated in August and  September along with investors’ concerns  about trade developments and the economic  outlook. Later in 2019 and into 2020, as  these concerns abated, equity prices rose  substantially and were reportedly boosted  by greater certainty among investors that  monetary policy would remain accommodative  in the near term. Gains were spread  across most major economic sectors, with  the exception of the energy sector, for which  stock prices declined markedly. Measures of  implied and realized stock price volatility for  the S&P 500 index—the VIX and the 20-day  realized volatility—increased in August to  fairly elevated levels but declined later in the  year. (For a discussion of financial  stability issues, see the box “Developments  Related to Financial Stability.”) Markets for Treasury securities, mortgage backed securities, and municipal bonds  have functioned well  While available indicators of Treasury market  functioning have generally remained stable since  the first half of 2019—including bid-ask  spreads, bid sizes, and estimates of transaction  costs—some, such as measures of market  depth, have decreased. However, the decline in  measures of market depth has reportedly not led  to any concerns about Treasury market liquidity.  Liquidity conditions in the agency MBS market  were also generally stable. Credit conditions in  municipal bond markets remained stable as well,  with yield spreads on 20-year general obligation  municipal bonds over comparable-maturity  Treasury securities declining notably and  standing near historically low levels.  Money market rates moved down in line  with decreases in the FOMC’s target  range, except for some notable volatility  in mid-September  Decreases in the FOMC’s target range for  the federal funds rate in July, September, and  October transmitted effectively through money  markets, with yields on a broad set of money  market instruments moving lower in response  to the FOMC’s policy actions.  The effective federal funds rate moved nearly in  parity with the interest rate paid on reserves  and was closely tracked by the overnight  Eurodollar rate. Other short-term interest  rates, including those on commercial paper and  negotiable certificates of deposit, also moved  down in line with decreases in the policy rate.  Domestic short-term funding markets were  volatile in mid-September—amid large flows  related to corporate tax payments and  settlement of Treasury securities—and  experienced significant tightening of conditions.  The effective federal funds rate rose above the  target range on September 17 but then moved  back within the target range following the  Federal Reserve’s open market operations,  which eased pressures in money markets.  Developments Related to Financial Stability The framework used by the Federal Reserve Board  for assessing the resilience of the U.S. financial system  focuses on financial vulnerabilities in four broad areas:  asset valuations, household and business debt, leverage  in the financial sector, and funding risks.  Asset prices have risen partly because of declines  in interest rates, but valuation pressures are elevated.  Equity prices increased nearly 30 percent over 2019,  and the forward price-to-earnings ratio has reached the  recent peak seen in 2018. In corporate debt  markets, the spreads of interest rates on newly issued  leveraged loans over LIBOR (London interbank offered  rate) have decreased since July 2019 across the credit quality spectrum, with spreads for the relatively higher rated issuers reaching their post-crisis lows. Spreads  on investment- and speculative-grade bonds over  comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed since  July 2019 and stand notably below their respective  medians. In commercial real estate markets,  prices continued to grow at a robust pace in recent  quarters, with capitalization rates at historically low  levels. Although house price growth slowed noticeably  in 2019, house prices still appear to lie modestly above  the level predicted by their historical relationship  with rents.  vulnerabilities associated with total private-sector  debt continue to be at a moderate level relative to their  historical norms. Total household debt has grown at  a slower pace than economic activity over the past  decade, in part reflecting that mortgage credit has  remained tight for borrowers with low credit scores,  undocumented income, or high debt-to-income ratios.  In contrast, business debt levels continue to be elevated  compared with either business assets or gross domestic  product, with the riskiest firms accounting for most of  the increase in debt in recent years. Although  the net issuance of riskier forms of business debt—  high-yield bonds and institutional leveraged loans—  has slowed since July 2019, it is still solid by historical  standards.  In addition, about half of investment-grade debt  outstanding is currently rated in the lowest category  of the investment-grade range (triple-B), a share that is  near an all-time high. The concentration of investment grade debt at the lower end of the investment-grade  spectrum creates the risk that adverse developments,  such as a deterioration in economic activity, could lead  to a sizable volume of bond downgrades to speculative grade ratings. Such conditions could trigger investors to  sell the downgraded bonds rapidly, increasing market  illiquidity and causing outsized downward price  pressures. Leverage in the financial sector appears low relative  to historical norms. The banking sector is much more  highly capitalized, in part due to the regulatory reforms  enacted after the financial crisis. In addition, the results  of the most recent stress test, released in June 2019,  indicated that these banks are well positioned to  continue lending to households and businesses even  in the event of a severe global recession. However,  several large banks have announced plans to distribute  capital to their shareholders in excess of expected  earnings, implying that capital at those banks will  decrease. Outside the banking sector, broker-dealers  as well as property-and-casualty insurance companies  continue to operate with historically low levels of  leverage. Leverage at life insurance companies has risen  but continues to be close to its average level over the  past two decades, and leverage at hedge funds remains  near the top of its range since 2014. Furthermore,  the outlook for profitability of a range of financial  institutions has weakened following declines in interest  rates. Weaker profitability could affect their ability to  absorb losses or build capital through retained earnings.  Funding risk in the banking sector remains low.  Banks rely only modestly on short-term wholesale  funding and maintain large amounts of high-quality  liquid assets in compliance with liquidity regulations  introduced after the financial crisis and the improved  understanding by banks of their liquidity risks. In  addition, money market mutual funds remain less prone  to runs than they were before the implementation of  the money market reforms, as the composition of assets  under management remains heavily tilted toward the  safer and more liquid government funds. Nonetheless,  the volatility in repurchase agreement (repo) markets  in mid-September 2019 highlighted the possibility for  frictions in repo markets to spill over to other markets.  Foreign financial, economic, and political  developments could pose a number of near-term risks  to the U.S. financial system. In China, fragilities in  the corporate and financial sector leave it vulnerable  to adverse developments. Because of the size of  the Chinese economy, significant distress in China  could spill over to U.S. and global markets through a  retrenchment of risk appetite, U.S. dollar appreciation,  and declines in trade and commodity prices.  In Europe, the risk of a “no-deal Brexit” passed  at the end of January, but the United Kingdom and  the European Union are still committed to conclude  negotiations over their future relationship—including  new trade arrangements—by the end of 2020. Failure  to do so could trigger market and economic disruptions  in Europe that may weaken systemically important  financial institutions and spill over to global markets,  leading to a tightening of U.S. financial conditions. Bank credit continued to expand, and  bank profitability remained robust  Aggregate credit provided by commercial  banks continued to expand through the second  half of 2019, as the strength in commercial real  estate and residential real estate loan growth,  helped by falling interest rates, more than  offset the slowdown in C&I and consumer  loans. In the second half of last year, the pace  of bank credit expansion was about in line  with that of nominal GDP, leaving the ratio  of total commercial bank credit to current dollar GDP little changed from its value last  June. Overall, measures of bank  profitability ticked down a bit in the third  quarter because of narrower net interest  margins but remain near their post-crisis highs.  International Developments  Growth in advanced foreign economies  weakened, but it appears to be stabilizing  Real GDP growth in several advanced  foreign economies (AFEs) appears to have  stepped down in the second half of the year. However, incoming data suggest  that the slowdown in the AFEs may have  bottomed out. Household spending has  generally remained resilient, sustained by  low unemployment rates and rising wages.  Financial conditions have improved further,  supported in part by accommodative monetary  policy actions. The protracted slump in global  manufacturing, which weighed on external  demand across the AFEs, is showing tentative  signs of nearing an end. In the euro area,  where manufacturing activity was particularly  weak, recent indicators suggest that growth  may be steadying. In Japan, real GDP appears  to have contracted sharply at the end of 2019,  following a consumption tax hike in October,  but its effects are likely to be transitory.  In the United Kingdom, Brexit-related  uncertainty weighed on economic activity  throughout 2019; around the turn of the year,  U.K. and European Union authorities took  the necessary steps to prevent a disorderly  Brexit from occurring on January 31, 2020,  but they still need to negotiate a new trade  arrangement.  Inflationary pressures remained subdued  in many advanced foreign economies  Against a backdrop of slower economic  growth, consumer prices in many AFEs  continued to rise at a subdued pace, especially  in the euro area and Japan. Canada  remains an exception, as inflation there  hovered around 2 percent.  Central banks in several advanced foreign  economies provided accommodation  In response to subdued growth and below target inflation, the European Central  Bank introduced a new stimulus package in  September of last year, including a deposit  rate cut of 10 basis points to negative  0.5 percent, a restart of its Asset Purchase  Programme, and more favorable terms for its  targeted longer-term refinancing operations.  Similarly, the Reserve Bank of Australia and  the Reserve Bank of New Zealand reduced  their policy rates in the second half of last  year, citing concerns about the global outlook.  The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England,  and the Bank of Japan kept their policy rates  unchanged, although communications by their  officials took a more dovish tone, emphasizing  increased downside risks to the global  economy. In contrast, Sweden’s Riksbank  and Norway’s Norges Bank increased their  policy rates, citing favorable macroeconomic  conditions and concerns about growing  financial imbalances.  Financial conditions in advanced foreign  economies eased further  Notwithstanding slowing global growth  and bouts of political tensions, financial  conditions in the AFEs, on balance, eased  further in the second half of 2019, supported  by accommodative central bank actions,  progress on trade negotiations between the  United States and China, and diminished fears  of a hard Brexit. Long-term interest rates in  many AFEs remained well below the levels  seen at the end of 2018. Equity  prices, as well as prices of other risky assets,  increased moderately. Sovereign  bond spreads over German bund yields for  euro-area peripheral countries narrowed  slightly. In recent weeks, however, equity and  bond markets gave up some of their gains as  uncertainty about the economic effects of the  coronavirus weighed on investors’ sentiment.  Growth slowed markedly in many  emerging market economies, but there  are tentative signs of stabilization  Chinese GDP growth slowed further in the  second half of 2019 against the backdrop of  increased tariffs on Chinese exports, global  weakness in trade and manufacturing, and  authorities’ deleveraging campaign that  continued to exert a drag on the economy. However, recent data suggest that  China’s economic activity picked up at the  end of last year, in part supported by some  fiscal and monetary policy stimulus and  some easing of trade tensions. In emerging  Asia excluding China, economic growth  was dragged down by a sharp contraction in  Hong Kong, where social and political unrest  resulted in severe economic disruptions, and  by weakness in India, where an ongoing credit  crunch continues to weigh on activity. In  several other Asian economies, GDP growth  held steady but at a lackluster pace amid  headwinds from moderating global growth.  GDP growth in Korea, Taiwan, and the  Philippines rebounded in the last quarter of  2019, consistent with signs of stabilization  in the global manufacturing cycle, especially  in the high-tech sector. However, the recent  emergence of the coronavirus could lead to  disruptions in China that spill over to other  Asian countries and, more generally, to the rest  of the global economy. Many Latin American economies continued to  underperform. Economic stagnation persisted  in Mexico, reflecting both domestic factors—  including market concerns about economic  policies—and external factors, notably,  renewed weakness in U.S. manufacturing  production. Severe social unrest in several  countries—including Chile, Ecuador, and  Bolivia—disrupted economic activity.  Argentina’s financial crisis continued, while  Venezuela’s economy likely continued to  contract. Growth in Brazil, in contrast, edged  up as aggregate demand continued to recover,  supported by further reductions in policy  interest rates.  Financial conditions in emerging market  economies fluctuated but, on net, eased  somewhat  Notwithstanding social and political tensions  as well as concerns about the global outlook,  financial conditions in the emerging market  economies (EMEs) eased somewhat in  the second half of 2019. Conditions were  supported by the accommodative actions  of the FOMC and several foreign central  banks and, later in the year, by progress in  the negotiations between the United States  and its major trading partners as well as  improved prospects about global growth. EME  equity prices generally increased, especially  for Brazil. And measures of EME  sovereign bond spreads over U.S. Treasury  yields generally decreased. Political  tensions in Hong Kong contributed to an  underperformance of Chinese risky assets.  After several months of withdrawals, flows to  dedicated EME mutual funds resumed in the  fourth quarter of 2019, consistent with the  improved sentiment toward global prospects.  However, in reaction to the  emergence of the coronavirus, in late January  equity and bond markets gave up some of  their gains.  The dollar fluctuated but is, on balance,  little changed  The foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar  fluctuated but is, on balance, little changed  compared with last July. While  concerns about global growth and trade  tensions contributed to the appreciation of  the dollar over the summer, monetary policy  easing by the Federal Reserve and progress  on U.S.–China trade negotiations led to a  depreciation of the dollar, especially with  respect to the Chinese renminbi. The British  pound appreciated notably against the dollar  as fears of a disorderly Brexit diminished.  The Federal Open Market Committee  reduced the federal funds rate to support  sustained economic expansion and foster  a return of inflation to the Committee’s  2 percent objective  After having gradually increased its target  range for the federal funds rate from late  2015 through the end of 2018, the Committee  maintained its target range for the federal  funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent during the  first half of 2019. In light of the implications  of global developments for the economic  outlook as well as muted inflation pressures,  the Federal Open Market Committee  (FOMC) lowered the target range for the  federal funds rate at its July, September, and  October meetings by 25 basis points each,  bringing it to 1½ to 1¾ percent.  At its December and January meetings, the  Committee judged that the prevailing stance  of monetary policy was appropriate to support  sustained expansion of economic activity,  strong labor market conditions, and inflation  returning to its symmetric 2 percent objective.  Future changes in the federal funds rate  will depend on the economic outlook  and risks to the outlook as informed by  incoming data  The FOMC has continued to emphasize  that the actual path of monetary policy will  depend on the evolution of the economic  outlook and risks to the outlook as informed  by incoming data. Specifically, in deciding on  the timing and size of future adjustments to  the target range for the federal funds rate, the  Committee will assess realized and expected  economic conditions relative to its objectives  of maximum employment and symmetric  2 percent inflation. This assessment will take  into account a wide range of information,  including measures of labor market conditions,  indicators of inflation pressures and inflation  expectations, and readings on financial and  international developments.  In addition to evaluating a wide range of  economic and financial data and information  gathered from business contacts and other  informed parties around the country,  policymakers routinely consult prescriptions  for the policy interest rate from various  monetary policy rules, which can provide  useful guidance to the FOMC. Although many  practical considerations make it undesirable  for the FOMC to mechanically follow the  prescriptions of any specific rule, the FOMC’s  framework for conducting systematic  monetary policy respects key principles of  good monetary policy embodied by these rules,  while at the same time, providing flexibility to  address many of the limitations of these policy  rules (see the box “Monetary Policy Rules and  Uncertainty in Monetary Policy Settings”).  The FOMC concluded the reduction of  its aggregate securities holdings in the  System Open Market Account . . .  At its July meeting, along with its decision to  lower the target range for the federal funds  rate, the FOMC also announced that it was  ending the runoff of securities holdings two  months earlier than the initially planned  termination at the end of September. Ending  the runoff earlier than initially planned was  seen as having only very small effects on the  balance sheet, with negligible implications for  the economic outlook. Moreover, doing so  avoided the appearance of inconsistency in  continuing to allow the balance sheet to run  off while simultaneously lowering the target  range for the federal funds rate. Since then, the Federal Reserve has rolled  over at auction all principal payments from  its holdings of Treasury securities and has  reinvested all principal payments from its  holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage backed securities (MBS) received during each  calendar month. The Committee intends to  continue to reduce its holdings of agency  debt and agency MBS, consistent with the  aim of holding primarily Treasury securities  in the long run. To allow for a gradual runoff  of the MBS portfolio, principal payments  from agency debt and agency MBS of up to  $20 billion per month have been reinvested  in Treasury securities; agency MBS principal  payments in excess of $20 billion each month  have been reinvested in agency MBS.  . . . and reaffirmed its intention to  implement monetary policy in a regime  with an ample supply of reserves  In a monetary policy regime with an ample  supply of reserves, control over the level of  the federal funds rate and other short-term  interest rates is exercised primarily through the  setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered  rates, and active management of the supply  of reserves is not required. The Federal  Reserve will still conduct periodic open market  operations as necessary to accommodate the  trend growth in the demand for its nonreserve  liabilities, such as currency in circulation, and  maintain an ample supply of reserves over  time. Separate from such periodic open market  operations, beginning in October 2019, the  Federal Reserve has implemented a temporary  program of open market operations,  specifically Treasury bill purchases, aimed  at durably raising reserves to levels at or  above those prevailing in early September. These actions are purely  technical measures to support the effective  implementation of the FOMC’s monetary  policy and are not intended to change the  stance of monetary policy. These Treasury  bill purchases are distinct from the large-scale  asset purchase programs that the Federal  Reserve deployed after the financial crisis. In  those programs, the Federal Reserve purchased  longer-term securities to put downward  pressure on longer-term interest rates and ease  broader financial conditions.  The Federal Reserve’s total assets have  increased from about $3.8 trillion last July to  about $4.1 trillion at present, with holdings  of Treasury securities at approximately  $2.4 trillion and holdings of agency debt and  agency MBS at approximately $1.4 trillion. The increase in the size of the  balance sheet partly reflects an increase in  the level of nonreserve liabilities—such as  currency in circulation and the TGA—and a  rise in the level of reserve balances, which have  increased from approximately $1.5 trillion last  July to approximately $1.6 trillion at present.  Meanwhile, interest income on the Federal  Reserve’s securities holdings has continued  to result in substantial remittances to the  U.S. Treasury. Preliminary data indicate that  the Federal Reserve remitted about $55 billion  in 2019.  The effective federal funds rate moved  down in line with the FOMC’s target  range for the federal funds rate  The Federal Reserve reduced the effective  federal funds rate following the FOMC’s  decisions in July, September, and October to  lower the target range for the federal funds rate  by reducing the interest rate paid on required  and excess reserve balances and the interest  rate offered on overnight reverse repurchase  agreements (ON RRPs). Specifically, the  Federal Reserve lowered the interest rate paid  on required and excess reserve balances to  2.10 percent in July, 1.80 percent in September,  and 1.55 percent in October. In addition,  the Federal Reserve lowered the ON RRP  offering rate to 2 percent in July, 1.70 percent  in September, and 1.45 percent in October. The  Federal Reserve also approved a ¼ percentage  point decrease in the discount rate (the  primary credit rate) in July, September, and  October. Yields on a broad set of money  market instruments also moved lower, roughly  in line with the effective federal funds rate, in  response to the FOMC’s policy decisions in  July, September, and October. The Federal Reserve continued the  review of its strategic framework for  monetary policy  In the second half of 2019, the Federal  Reserve continued the review of its monetary  policy strategy, tools, and communication  practices. The goal of this assessment is  to identify possible ways to improve the  Committee’s current policy framework in  order to ensure that the Federal Reserve is  best positioned going forward to achieve its  statutory mandate of maximum employment  and price stability. (The box “Federal Reserve  Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools,  and Communication Practices” discusses  the review and the public outreach that has  accompanied it.) Monetary policy rules are mathematical formulas  that relate a policy interest rate, such as the federal  funds rate, to a small number of other economic  variables—typically including the deviation of inflation  from its target value and a measure of resource slack in  the economy. The prescriptions for the policy interest  rate from these rules can provide helpful guidance for  the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).  This discussion examines prescriptions from selected  policy rules and considers how these prescriptions  often depend on judgments and assumptions about  economic variables that are inherently uncertain and  may change over time. Notably, many policy rules  depend on estimates of resource slack and of the  longer-run neutral real interest rate, both of which  are not directly observable and are estimated with  a high degree of uncertainty. As a result, the policy  stance that these rules prescribe—and whether that  stance is appropriate in light of underlying economic  conditions—is also uncertain. Such a situation cautions  against mechanically following the prescriptions of any  specific rule.  Policy Rules: Some Key Design Principles  and Historical Prescriptions  In many models of the economy, good economic  performance can be achieved by following a monetary  policy rule that fosters public understanding and that  incorporates key principles of good monetary policy.  One such principle is that monetary policy should  respond in a predictable way to changes in economic  conditions. A second principle is that monetary policy  should be accommodative when inflation is below  policymakers’ longer-run inflation objective and  employment is below its maximum sustainable level;  conversely, monetary policy should be restrictive when  the opposite holds. A third principle is that, to stabilize  inflation, the policy rate should be adjusted over time  by more than one-for-one in response to persistent  increases or decreases in inflation.  Economists have analyzed many monetary policy  rules, including the well-known Taylor (1993) rule, the  “balanced approach” rule, the “adjusted Taylor (1993)”  rule, the “price level” rule, and the “first difference”  rule. These policy rules embody the three  key principles of good monetary policy and take into  account estimates of how far the economy is from the  Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate goals of maximum  employment and price stability. The Taylor (1993),  balanced-approach, adjusted Taylor (1993), and  price-level rules provide prescriptions for the level of  the federal funds rate; all require an estimate of the  neutral real interest rate in the longer run (rt LR)—that is,  the level of the real federal funds rate that is expected  to be consistent, in the longer run, with maximum  employment and stable inflation. The rules feature the  unemployment rate gap, measured as the difference  between an estimate of the rate of unemployment that  is sustainable in the longer run (ut LR) and the current  unemployment rate; the first-difference rule includes  the change in the unemployment gap rather than its  level. In addition, four of the five rules include the  difference between recent inflation and the FOMC’s  longer-run objective of 2 percent, whereas the price level rule includes the gap between the level of prices  today and the level of prices that would have been  realized if inflation had been constant at 2 percent from  a specified starting year. The price-level rule thereby  takes account of the deviation of inflation from the  longer-run objective in earlier periods as well as in the  current period, in contrast with the other rules that do  not make up past misses of the inflation objective.  The adjusted Taylor (1993) rule recognizes that  the federal funds rate cannot be reduced materially  below zero and that following the prescriptions  of the standard Taylor (1993) rule after a recession  during which the federal funds rate has fallen to its  effective lower bound may therefore not provide  enough policy accommodation. To make up for the  cumulative shortfall in accommodation, the adjusted  Taylor (1993) rule prescribes only a gradual return of  the policy rate to the (positive) levels prescribed by the  standard Taylor (1993) rule after the economy begins  to recover. Similarly, the price-level rule specified in  figure A recognizes that the federal funds rate cannot be  reduced materially below zero. If inflation runs below  the 2 percent objective during periods when the policy  rate is constrained by the effective lower bound, this  rule will, over time, call for more accommodation to  make up for the past inflation shortfall.  Figure B shows historical prescriptions for the  federal funds rate from the five rules described earlier.  For each period, the figure reports the policy rates  prescribed by the rules given prevailing economic  conditions and estimates of ut LR and rt LR at the time.  The prescribed values often vary widely across rules.  Because there is no definitive standard for favoring  one rule over another, consulting a range of rules is  generally preferable to relying on any particular rule.  Estimates of rt LR and ut LR: Uncertainty and  Revisions  As already noted, the level of the neutral real interest  rate and the unemployment rate that is sustainable in  the longer run is not directly observable and can be  estimated only imprecisely. The neutral real interest  rate in the longer run is determined by structural  features of the economy, including trend productivity  growth, demographics, and risk-taking behavior. The  unemployment rate that can be sustained in the longer  run is also determined largely by nonmonetary factors,  such as demographics, educational attainment, and  the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These  various determining factors may change over time and  may not be directly measurable, hence leading to time varying and uncertain estimates of ut LR and rt LR.  Since 2000, forecasters in the Blue Chip survey  have markedly reduced their estimates of the longer run level of the real short-term interest rate.  FOMC participants have also lowered their estimates  of the real federal funds rate in the longer run since  the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, began  reporting this information in 2012. Similarly, in recent  years, FOMC participants as well as outside forecasters  and analysts generally have lowered their estimates of  the longer-run unemployment rate considerably.  Figure D illustrates the imprecision with which  the longer-run neutral real interest rate is estimated  by reporting values from several time-series models,  along with measures of the uncertainty surrounding  these values. The models use statistical techniques to  capture the variations among inflation, interest rates,  real gross domestic product, unemployment, and other  data series. The point estimates are dispersed across  models, ranging from 0.3 to 2.1 percent. Moreover,  the 95 percent uncertainty bands around the estimates  illustrate the substantial uncertainty inherent in such  estimates. Some Implications for Monetary Policy  The longer-run neutral level of the federal funds  rate—equal to the sum of the neutral real interest  rate in the longer run and the FOMC’s 2 percent  inflation objective—is one benchmark for evaluating  the current stance of monetary policy. Uncertainty about estimates of the longer-run neutral real interest  rate leads to uncertainty about how far the current  federal funds rate is from its longer-run neutral level.  For the Taylor (1993), balanced-approach, adjusted  Taylor (1993), and price-level rules, a decrease in the  assumed longer-run neutral real interest rate translates  one-for-one into a decline in these rules’ prescribed  settings for the federal funds rate. Therefore, to the  extent that the downward revisions to estimates  of rt LR reflect learning that the longer-run neutral  rate was lower than had been assessed previously,  the historical prescriptions of these rules would  be less accommodative than previously thought.  Uncertainty about estimates of the longer-run normal  unemployment rate also imparts uncertainty to these  rules’ prescriptions. For example, given current  economic conditions, the assumption of a lower  sustainable rate of unemployment in the longer run  translates one-for-one into reduced unemployment  gaps in the rules and, in turn, leads to lower prescribed  values of the policy rate.  Figure E compares the prescriptions of the Taylor  (1993) rule based on the historical median estimates  of ut LR and rt LR from the Blue Chip survey and the prescriptions generated based on the  latest median estimates of these variables. The federal  funds rate prescriptions based on the latest estimates  (black line) are lower than the prescriptions based on  the historical estimates (red line). For example, using  the latest median estimates, the rule’s prescribed federal  funds rates for 2012 are about 3 percentage points  lower than the values prescribed based on the historical  estimates. Figure E also shows that revisions to the  estimates of ut LR and rt LR contribute roughly equally to  the difference in the policy rate prescriptions of the  Taylor (1993) rule based on the historical and the latest  estimates of ut LR and rt LR.   To conclude, this discussion illustrates that policy  rules crucially entail an important element of judgment.  Moreover, the inherent uncertainty about some of the  variables included in these rules leads to significant  uncertainty regarding their policy settings, which  cautions against strict adherence to any particular rule. Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools,  and Communication Practices Overview  In 2019, the Federal Reserve began a broad  review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and  communication practices it uses to pursue its statutory  dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and  price stability. The Federal Reserve is undertaking the  review because the U.S. economy appears to have  changed in ways that matter for monetary policy. For  example, the neutral level of the policy interest rate  appears to have fallen in the United States and abroad,  increasing the risk that the effective lower bound on  interest rates will constrain central banks from reducing  their policy interest rates enough to effectively support  economic activity during downturns. The review is  considering what monetary policy strategy will best  enable the Federal Reserve to meet its dual mandate  in the future, whether the existing monetary policy  tools are sufficient to achieve and maintain the dual  mandate, and how its communication about monetary  policy can be improved.  Fed Listens Initiative  A key component of the review has been a series  of public Fed Listens events aimed at consulting with  a broad range of stakeholders in the U.S. economy.  The goal of Fed Listens was for policymakers to engage  directly with a range of individuals and groups on  issues pertaining to the dual-mandate objectives of  maximum employment and stable prices.  From February to October 2019, the Federal Reserve  hosted 14 public Fed Listens events—one at the Board  of Governors, one at each of the 12 Reserve Banks, and  a System research conference at the Federal Reserve  Bank of Chicago. The events featured a broad range of  participants drawn from the System’s existing advisory  councils and community networks and from outreach  conducted specifically for the Fed Listens initiative. The  participants represented small businesses, labor unions,  state and local governments, schools and community  colleges, workforce development organizations,  housing groups, community development financial  institutions (CDFIs), retirees, and academia.  Most of the events were conducted in a town  hall format with one or more panel sessions. A few  incorporated site visits to schools and businesses  to learn about local initiatives in underserved  communities to increase education, combine high  school completion with work experience, or offer  after-hours vocational training to enhance skill levels.  At the events, participants were asked how  they viewed the relative importance of maximum  employment and price stability and how monetary  policy actions affected them and the people they  represent. Participants commented on labor market  conditions and whether they saw those conditions  as consistent with the dual-mandate objective of  maximum employment; they also offered perspectives  on inflation, lending conditions, and how people  in their organizations or communities responded to  interest rate changes. In addition, participants often  compared economic conditions today with conditions  a few years or a decade ago and assessed the Federal  Reserve’s public communications. In keeping with  the transparency of the review, all of the events were  livestreamed, with written summaries of the events  posted on System websites afterward. Takeaways from Fed Listens  While the Fed Listens events covered a broad range  of topics, participants consistently highlighted a few  points. Representatives of disadvantaged communities  generally saw the strong labor market as providing  significant benefits to their constituents—primarily by  providing job opportunities for people who had had  difficulty finding jobs in the past. These representatives  also expressed concern about how newly hired workers  would fare in the next downturn and whether the job  experience they will have acquired by then would  allow them to retain their jobs during the downturn or  obtain jobs easily after the economy recovers.  Small business owners and representatives from  business organizations said finding qualified workers  to fill available positions was a challenge in the current  labor market conditions. As a result, businesses are  partnering with workforce development agencies or  community colleges to devise training programs or  specialized curriculums to prepare would-be workers.  In addition, firms have been more willing to hire people  who would not have been considered in less favorable  labor market conditions. However, businesses generally  are not increasing wages to attract and retain workers.  Instead, they are offering new training or education  programs and adding or augmenting health-care and  other benefits.  While businesses and CDFIs generally found  low interest rates to be beneficial, representatives  of underserved populations and retirees conveyed  different views. Many people in lower-income  communities generally have little or no access to  conventional credit. Consequently, they often do not  benefit when interest rates on conventional credit fall as  a result of the Fed’s actions. In addition, we heard that  retirees with savings have seen interest income on their  savings decline. Participants acknowledged that inflation is low,  and representatives of small businesses or business  associations emphasized the importance of stable and  predictable inflation for planning and decisionmaking.  Participants representing retirees said rising costs of  health care and prescription drugs pose challenges for  people on fixed incomes, while representatives of low and middle-income communities said the people they  represent still struggle to afford basic necessities such  as housing, utilities, and food. Participants generally  did not regard the fact that aggregate inflation is  running modestly below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent  objective as a problem. That perception highlights  a challenge for the Federal Reserve as it publicly  communicates about the rationale for the review and  the importance of anchoring inflation expectations at  2 percent for keeping policy interest rates sufficiently  above the effective lower bound.  Policymaker Discussions  Since the summer of 2019, Federal Reserve  policymakers have been discussing issues associated  with the monetary policy strategy review at meetings  of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). At  its July, September, and October meetings, the FOMC  reviewed the performance of its current approach to  monetary policy, discussed possible alternative policy  strategies, and reviewed policy tools. Key points of  these discussions have been summarized in publicly  released meeting minutes. In December, the FOMC  considered the views offered at the Fed Listens events  together with staff analysis on the distributional effects  of monetary policy. The FOMC’s discussions are  continuing into 2020. Policymakers expect to complete  the review around the middle of this year. At that time,  policymakers will report their findings to the public. Money Market Developments and Monetary  Policy Implementation Consistent with its decision at the January 2019  meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)  reaffirmed, in its Statement Regarding Monetary Policy  Implementation on October 11, 2019, the intention  to implement monetary policy in a regime with an  ample supply of reserves. In such a system, active  management of reserves through frequent open market  operations is not required, and control over the level of  the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates  is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal  Reserve’s administered rates.  In recent years, depository institutions’ reserve  balances held at the Federal Reserve have declined as  a result of the normalization of the Federal Reserve’s  balance sheet as well as growth in nonreserve  liabilities. Reserves dropped from a peak of about  $2.8 trillion in 2014 to about $2.2 trillion in late  September 2017, largely reflecting the expansion of  nonreserve liabilities. Subsequently, reserves declined  further, reflecting the FOMC’s decision to allow a  gradual runoff of maturing securities, and, by the  time the FOMC decided to conclude the reduction  of its aggregate securities holdings in August 2019,  reserves had fallen to about $1.5 trillion. Despite the  cessation of balance sheet runoff in August 2019,  reserves subsequently continued to decline because of  increases in currency and other nonreserve liabilities  and reached a multiyear low of about $1.4 trillion in  September 2019.  Against a backdrop of declining reserves and high  levels of Treasury securities outstanding, in mid- September 2019, imbalances in the supply of and  demand for short-term funding led to pressures in  the repurchase agreement (repo) market—a money  market segment in which banks, securities dealers,  money market funds (MMFs), and other financial  market participants lend to and borrow from each  other for short periods against high-quality collateral.  On the demand side, dealers’ and other investors’  needs for financing securities had increased following  the settlement of Treasury auctions at mid-month. On  the supply side, some institutional investors, such as  government-only MMFs and banks, may have been  reluctant to increase lending because they faced  uncertainty regarding cash outflows as their clients  were making corporate tax payments due in mid September. As a result, repo rates rose sharply in  mid-September. Pressures in the repo market  spilled over to other short-term funding markets,  including the federal funds market. The federal funds  rate firmed, moving out of its target range for one day. In response to elevated rates,  the Federal Reserve began conducting repo operations  to help stabilize money markets and provide reserves  to keep the federal funds rate within its target range. These operations have been effective in  meeting these goals.  Consistent with its decision to implement monetary  policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves,  on October 11, 2019, the Committee announced its  decision to purchase Treasury bills at least into the  second quarter of 2020 in order to maintain reserves at  or above the level that prevailed in early September. In addition, the FOMC announced  term and overnight repo operations to ensure that  the supply of reserves remains ample even during  periods of sharp increases in nonreserve liabilities and  to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that  could adversely affect policy implementation. Repos  outstanding, consisting of both overnight and term  operations, have been about $209 billion per day,  on average, since the announcement on  October 11, 2019. These operations are expected to  decline over time as Treasury bill purchases supply a  larger base of reserves.  The Federal Reserve’s open market operations—  repo operations and bill purchases—lifted reserves  to levels averaging about $1.6 trillion in early 2020.  Besides adding reserves, the repo operations damped  funding pressures in repo markets that may otherwise  have passed through to the federal funds market. As  such, the combination of repo operations and bill  purchases fostered conditions that helped maintain  the federal funds rate within the target range. Notably,  with the provision of about $250 billion in liquidity via  the Federal Reserve’s repo operations, money market  conditions were quite calm on year-end. Both secured  and unsecured overnight funding rates printed in line  with the interest rate on excess reserves. summary of eConomiC ProjeCtions In conjunction with the Federal Open  Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on  December 10–11, 2019, meeting participants  submitted their projections of the most likely  outcomes for real gross domestic product  (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and  inflation for each year from 2019 to 2022  and over the longer run. Each participant’s  projections were based on information  available at the time of the meeting, together  with his or her assessment of appropriate  monetary policy—including a path for the  federal funds rate and its longer-run value—  and assumptions about other factors likely  to affect economic outcomes. The longer run projections represent each participant’s  assessment of the value to which each variable  would be expected to converge, over time,  under appropriate monetary policy and in the  absence of further shocks to the economy.  “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as  the future path of policy that each participant  deems most likely to foster outcomes for  economic activity and inflation that best  satisfy his or her individual interpretation of  the statutory mandate to promote maximum  employment and price stability.  Almost all participants expected that, under  appropriate monetary policy, growth of real  GDP in 2020 would run at or slightly above  1.9 percent, the median of current estimates  of its longer-run rate. The median of the  projections for the growth rate of real GDP  edges down each year over the projection  horizon and, for 2022, is modestly below the  median of the current estimates of its  longer-run rate. The median of the current  projections for the unemployment rate was  lower than that in the September Summary of  Economic Projections (SEP) for each year of  the projection period, and some participants  reduced their estimates of the longer-run  normal rate of unemployment, resulting in  a slight decline in the median estimate. The  medians of the projections for both total and  core inflation, as measured by the four-quarter  percent change in the price index for personal  consumption expenditures (PCE), increase  significantly from 2019 to 2020 and more  modestly in 2021 to reach 2 percent that year.  Almost all participants expected that inflation  would be at or slightly above the Committee’s  2 percent objective in 2021 and 2022. A couple  more participants, relative to the September  SEP, projected inflation to exceed 2 percent  at some point during the projection period.  The medians of the projections for both total  and core inflation were unchanged for 2020  through 2022, compared with the September  SEP. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary  statistics for the projections.  As shown in figure 2, a substantial majority of  participants indicated that their expectations  regarding the evolution of the economy,  relative to the Committee’s objectives of  maximum employment and 2 percent inflation,  would likely warrant keeping the federal  funds at its current level through the end of  2020. Compared with the September SEP  submissions, the median projection for the  federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower  in each year over the projection period and  retained its modest upward tilt in 2021 and  2022. The median of participants’ assessments  of the appropriate level for the federal funds  rate in 2022 was slightly below the median of  estimates of its longer-run level; the median  estimate of the longer-run level was unchanged  from its value in the September SEP.  Most participants regarded the uncertainties  around their projections as broadly similar  to the average over the past 20 years. The  majority of participants continued to assess  the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth  as weighted to the downside and for the  unemployment rate as weighted to the upside.  However, compared with the September  submissions, several participants shifted their  assessments of the balance of risks around  these projections to being broadly balanced.  Most participants judged the risks to their  inflation outlook as broadly balanced, though  one-third of participants viewed the risks to  their inflation projections as weighted to the  downside; no participant assessed the risks  to his or her inflation outlook as weighted  to the upside. The uncertainties and risks  around participants’ projections for headline  and core inflation were little changed from the  September SEP.  The Outlook for Real GDP Growth  and Unemployment  As shown in table 1, the medians of  participants’ projections for real GDP  growth in 2019 and 2020, conditional on  their individual assessments of appropriate  monetary policy, were 2.2 percent and  2.0 percent, respectively, a touch above the  median estimate of the longer-run growth rate  of 1.9 percent. The median of the projections  for the growth rate of real GDP declines slowly  over the projection horizon and, in 2022, is  modestly below the median of the current  estimates of its longer-run rate. The medians  of the projections for real GDP growth in all  four years of the projection period, as well as  in the longer run, were unchanged from the  September SEP.  A majority of participants marked down  their projections of the unemployment rate in  each year of the projection period, and some  participants lowered their estimates of the  longer-run normal rate of unemployment.  As a result, the medians of the projections  for the unemployment rate in the fourth  quarter of 2020 through 2022 were  3.5 percent, 3.6 percent, and 3.7 percent,  respectively, each 0.2 percentage point lower  than in the September projections. The  median estimate of the longer-run normal  rate of unemployment was 4.1 percent,  0.1 percentage point lower than in September.  Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions  of participants’ projections for real GDP  growth and the unemployment rate,  respectively, from 2019 to 2022 and in the  longer run. The distribution of individual  projections for real GDP growth for 2020  tilted slightly higher, as many participants  upgraded their projections a bit relative to  those in the September SEP, although the  median projection was unchanged. The  distributions of individual projections of real  GDP growth in 2021 and 2022 and in the  longer run were little changed overall. The  distributions of individual projections for the  unemployment rate from 2020 to 2022 and in  the longer run shifted lower relative to those  in September. The Outlook for Inflation  As shown in table 1, the median projection for  core PCE price inflation was 1.6 percent for  2019, a modest decrease from the September  projections. The medians of the projections  for both total and core PCE price inflation  were each 1.9 percent in 2020 and 2.0 percent  in both 2021 and 2022—all unchanged from  September. Figures 3.C and 3.D show the  distributions of participants’ views about  their outlooks for inflation. Although the  medians of the projections for total and core  PCE price inflation from 2020 through 2022  were unchanged from the September SEP, a  couple more participants projected inflation  to be slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent  objective in 2022.  Appropriate Monetary Policy  Figure 3.E shows the distributions of  participants’ judgments regarding the  appropriate target—or midpoint of the target  range—for the federal funds rate at the end  of each year from 2019 to 2022 and over  the longer run. A substantial majority of  participants projected a federal funds rate  of 1.63 percent for the end of 2020. Four  participants assessed that the most likely  appropriate rate at year-end for 2020 would  be 1.88 percent. For subsequent years, the  medians of the projections were 1.88 percent  at the end of 2021 and 2.13 percent at the  end of 2022. The distribution of participants’  estimates of the longer-run level of the federal  funds rate was little changed, and the median  estimate was unchanged from September at  2.50 percent.  Compared with the projections prepared for  the September SEP, a number of participants  marked down their assessments of the  appropriate level of the federal funds rate  at the end of 2020, reflecting in part the  reduction in the target range at the October  meeting and causing both the range and  central tendency of projections for 2020  to narrow considerably. Some participants  lowered their projections for the appropriate  level in 2021 and 2022. The median projection  for the federal funds rate was 25 basis points  lower in each year in the projection period.  Realized inflation running persistently below  target and risks associated with trade policy  and foreign economic growth were cited as  key factors informing participants’ judgments  about the appropriate path for the federal  funds rate.  Uncertainty and Risks  In assessing the appropriate path of the federal  funds rate, FOMC participants take account  of the range of possible economic outcomes,  the likelihood of those outcomes, and the  potential benefits and costs should they occur.  As a reference, table 2 provides measures of  forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast  errors of various private and government  forecasts over the past 20 years—for real  GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and  total PCE price inflation. Those measures are  represented graphically in the “fan charts”  shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B,  and 4.C. The fan charts display the SEP  medians for the three variables surrounded  by symmetric confidence intervals derived  from the forecast errors reported in table 2.  If the degree of uncertainty attending these  projections is similar to the typical magnitude  of past forecast errors and the risks around the  projections are broadly balanced, then future  outcomes of these variables would have about  a 70 percent probability of being within these  confidence intervals. For all three variables,  this measure of uncertainty is substantial and  generally increases as the forecast horizon  lengthens.  Participants’ assessments of the level of  uncertainty surrounding their individual  economic projections are shown in the bottom left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. A  substantial majority of participants viewed  the uncertainty surrounding each of the four  economic variables as being broadly similar to  the average over the past 20 years.  Because the fan charts are constructed to be  symmetric around the median projections,  they do not reflect any asymmetries in the  balance of risks that participants may see  in their economic projections. Participants’  assessments of the balance of risks to their  current economic projections are shown in  the bottom-right panels of figures 4.A, 4.B,  and 4.C. Relative to the September SEP, more  participants saw the risks to the outlook for  real GDP growth and the unemployment  rate as broadly balanced, although a small  majority continued to view the risks to their  outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to  the downside and for the unemployment rate  as weighted to the upside. Most participants  continued to judge the risks to their inflation  outlook as broadly balanced, while some  participants viewed the risks to their inflation  outlook as weighted to the downside. No  participant assessed the risks to his or her  inflation outlook as weighted to the upside.  In discussing the uncertainty and risks  surrounding their economic projections, some  participants mentioned trade developments  and concerns about foreign economic growth  as sources of uncertainty or downside risk  to the U.S. economic growth outlook. In  contrast, the underlying strength of both  consumer spending and the labor market  was cited as balancing the risks around the  growth outlook. In addition, most of the  participants who shifted their balance of risks  for output growth to “broadly balanced” cited  more accommodative monetary policy as a  contributing factor. For the inflation outlook,  the possibility that inflation expectations  could be drifting below levels consistent with  the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective  was viewed as a downside risk. A couple of  participants mentioned higher tariffs as a  source of upside risk to their inflation outlook.  Participants’ assessments of the appropriate  future path of the federal funds rate are also  subject to considerable uncertainty. Because  the Committee adjusts the federal funds  rate in response to actual and prospective  developments over time in key economic  variables—such as real GDP growth,  the unemployment rate, and inflation—  uncertainty surrounding the projected path  for the federal funds rate importantly reflects  the uncertainties about the paths for these  economic variables, along with other factors.  Figure 5 provides a graphic representation  of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median  for the federal funds rate surrounded by  symmetric confidence intervals derived from  the results presented in table 2. As with  the macroeconomic variables, the forecast  uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path  of the federal funds rate is substantial and  increases for longer horizons. Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the  members of the Board of Governors and the presidents  of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of  monetary policy among policymakers and can aid  public understanding of the basis for policy actions.  Considerable uncertainty attends these projections,  however. The economic and statistical models and  relationships used to help produce economic forecasts  are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real  world, and the future path of the economy can be  affected by myriad unforeseen developments and  events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy,  participants consider not only what appears to be  the most likely economic outcome as embodied in  their projections, but also the range of alternative  possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the  potential costs to the economy should they occur.  Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy  of a range of forecasts, including those reported in  past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared  by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of  meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee  (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the  table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated  with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a  participant projects that real gross domestic product  (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at  annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent.  If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar  to that experienced in the past and the risks around  the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers  reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about  70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a  range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.4 to  4.6 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent  in the third and fourth years. The corresponding  70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation  would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1  to 2.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent  in the third year, and 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the  fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these  confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric  and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’  projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate,  and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks  around the projections may not be symmetric. In  particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative;  furthermore, the risks around a particular projection  might be tilted to either the upside or the downside,  in which case the corresponding fan chart would  be asymmetrically positioned around the median  projection.  Because current conditions may differ from those  that prevailed, on average, over history, participants  provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty  attached to their projections of each economic  variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly  similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen  in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and  reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals  shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.  Participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty  surrounding their projections are summarized in the  bottom-left panels of those figures. Participants also  provide judgments as to whether the risks to their  projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted  to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,  while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in  the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that  the risks to participants’ projections are balanced,  participants may judge that there is a greater risk that  a given variable will be above rather than below their  projections. These judgments are summarized in the  lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.  As with real activity and inflation, the outlook  for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject  to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises  primarily because each participant’s assessment of  the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends  importantly on the evolution of real activity and  inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve  in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the  appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would  change from that point forward. The final line in  table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short term interest rates. They suggest that the historical  confidence intervals associated with projections  of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should  be noted, however, that these confidence intervals  are not strictly consistent with the projections for  the federal funds rate, as these projections are not  forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but  rather are projections of participants’ individual  assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are  on an end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors  should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the  future path of the federal funds rate generated by the  uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as  well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that  would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to  the economy.  If at some point in the future the confidence  interval around the federal funds rate were to extend  below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes  of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom  of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate  that has been adopted by the Committee in the past.  This approach to the construction of the federal funds  rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would  not have any implications for possible future policy  decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to  provide additional monetary policy accommodation  if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the  Committee could also employ other tools, including  forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide  additional accommodation.  While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information  on the uncertainty around the economic projections,  figure 1 provides information on the range of views  across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1  with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion  of the projections across participants is much smaller  than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years.