Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2020, the People's Bank of China (PBC) has resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. With the sound monetary policy more flexible, appropriate, and targeted, money and credit and aggregate financing witnessed a reasonable growth in scale, the credit structure was further improved, and the quality and efficiency of financial services for the real economy were increasingly higher, thus driving the steady recovery of the macro-economy and yielding positive results for stabilizing businesses and securing employment. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level From the third quarter of 2020, amid the changes in economic and financial conditions, the PBC had a rational grasp of the intensity and pace of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) and open market operations (OMOs) to promptly satisfy reasonable demands for liquidity in financial institutions. Liquidity in the banking system was constantly kept adequate at a reasonable level, and an equilibrium was maintained between liquidity supply and demand in the short, medium, and long terms. Capacity to adjust liquidity has been further improved. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened expectation management by announcing monetary policy arrangements in advance and it ironed out short-term fluctuations in the market in a timely manner. With the system of policy interest rates further refined, money market interest rates were guided to move smoothly around the OMO rates, and the volatility of interest rates was further reduced. Stable market expectations enabled financial institutions to trim down their preventive demands for liquidity. At the end of September, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.6 percent, down 0.2 percentage points from the previous year. II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the credit structure optimized and the lending rates moving downwards Loans grew at a reasonable rate and the financial sector continued to support the recovery of the real economy. Pursuing a sound monetary policy, the PBC properly managed the intensity, pace, and focus of adjustments in line with the requirement of being flexible, appropriate, and targeted, and it constantly released the potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform to lower financing costs. The role of a targeted structural monetary policy was brought into play to promote lending in favor of micro and small businesses (MSBs) and private enterprises. Outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 12.8 percent year on year to RMB175.5 trillion at end-September, increasing RMB16.9 trillion from the beginning of the year and RMB3.1 trillion more than the increase in the corresponding period of 2019. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 13.0 percent year on year to RMB169.4 trillion, up RMB16.3 trillion from the beginning of the year and a larger increase of RMB2.6 trillion compared with the corresponding period of the previous year. The credit structure was remarkably optimized. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector and loans to MSBs recorded a rapid growth. At end-September, loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB10.6 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB2.3 trillion. Medium and long-termloans to the manufacturing sector gained 30.5 percent, an acceleration for eleven consecutive months. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 29.6 percent year on year to RMB14.6 trillion at end-September and their growth rates hit new records from March to September. These loans supported 31.28 million MSBs, increasing 21.8 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, inclusive loans to MSBs increased by RMB3 trillion, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.2 trillion.The weighted average interest rates on loans stood at a relatively low level and corporate lending rates continued to move downwards. In September, the one-year LPR fell by 0.3 percentage points from December 2019 to 3.85 percent, and the overfive-year LPR fell by 0.15 percentage points to 4.65 percent. In September, the weighted average lending rate recorded 5.12 percent, down 0.32 percentage points from December 2019 and 0.5 percentage points year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 5.31 percent, down 0.43 percentage points from December 2019 and 0.65 percentage points year on year; the weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.49 percentage points from December 2019 to 4.63 percent, a drop clearly exceeding that of the LPR, which is conducive to lowering the financing costs of enterprises.The sustained easy monetary policies of the developed economies prompted a decrease in the interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans. In September, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominateddeposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.21 percent and 0.72 percent, respectively, up 0.01 percentage points and down 0.03 percentage points, respectively, from June. The weighted average interest rates of USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.37 percent and 1.24 percent, respectively, down 0.20 percentage points and 0.23 percentage points, respectively, from June.Growth of deposits picked up. At end-September, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB216.9 trillion, up 10.7 percent year on year, 2.1 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB211.1 trillion, up 10.7 percent year on year, 2 percentage points higher than those at the end of the previous year.Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD848.7 billion, an increase of USD90.9 billion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of USD86.2 billion year on year. Fiscal revenues declined, expenditures for pandemic containment increased, and the distribution of funds for special bonds accelerated. Fiscal deposits decreased by 2.9 percent year on year.III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at a reasonable rate At end-September, outstanding M2 recorded RMB216.4 trillion, up 10.9 percent year on year, an acceleration of 2.2 percentage points from the end of 2019. Outstanding M1 registered RMB60.2 trillion, a year-on-year growth of 8.1 percent and 3.7 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding M0 reached RMB8.2 trillion, up 11.1 percent year on year and an increase of 5.7 percentage points from the end of 2019. The first three quarters of 2020 witnessed a net cash injection into the economy of RMB518.1 billion, a rise of RMB426.0 billionAccording to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) reached RMB280.07 trillion at end-September, up 13.5 percent year on year and an acceleration of 2.8 percentage points over the end of the previous year. In the first three quarters of 2020, the incremental AFRE reached RMB29.62 trillion on a cumulative basis, an increase of RMB9.01 trillion year on year. Growth of the AFRE was characterized by the following features. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-year increase. Second, the drop in entrusted loans narrowed and the year-on-year growth in undiscounted bankers’ acceptances expanded. Third, both corporate bonds and equity financing increased considerably compared with the previous year. Fourth, government bonds saw a significantly larger year-on-year increase. Fifth, the decline in asset-backed securities of depository financial institutions accelerated from the previous year, while the growth in written- off loans accelerated.Box 1 The Correct Approach to Understanding the Relationship Between the Central Bank Balance Sheet and Money Supply In the traditional view, a change in broad money (M2) results from a change in base money, which is amplified by the money multiplier. As base money mainly consists of currency in circulation, required reserves, and excess reserves, it constitutes the major liabilities of the central bank, reflects implementation of the monetary policy, and is close to the size of the central bank’s balance sheet numerically. Therefore, a changein the size of the central bank’s balance sheet is easily regarded as a change in the monetary policy stance. As a matter of fact, there is no constant correlation between the growth of M2 and the change in the size of the central bank’s balance sheet and base money. Commercial banks, rather than the central bank, are the direct broad money creators. In reality, M2 is created by banks through credit expansion, such as bank lending, which is an independent behavior by banks and has nothing to do with base money. The central bank both provides support for and puts constraints on bank money creation by adjusting base money. When creating money through bank lending, the banks transfer the excess reserves, which are equal to a certain proportion of the new deposits, into the required reserves according to the requirements of the central bank. The central bank itself is not the money creator. It should be noted that excess reserves are the liquidity in the banking system that can support money creation by banks, while the required reserves are the “frozen” liquidity in the banking system that cannot support money creation. As the central bank’s balance sheet and base money include the sum of the above two items, it is of little significance to simply use them to analyze the monetary policy stance. For example, prior to the global financial crisis in 2008, the size of the US Fed’s balance sheet remained basically unchanged, and its monetary policy stance was tightened or loosened mainly through adjustments of the policy rate. Another example is that the size of the balance sheet of China’s central bank expanded cumulatively eight times from early 2000 to end-2013, along with which there were also changes in China’s monetary policy stance.Over a broader time span, the balance sheet expansion of China’s central bank has been roughly the same as that of the central banks of the major developed economies. From the beginning of 2000 to end-September 2020, the balance sheet of China’s central bank expanded 9.6 times, which was roughly the same as that of the US Fed (9.5 times), the European Central Bank (7.1 times), and the Bank of Japan (5.2 times) over the same period (see Figure 2). The balance sheet expansion of China’s central bank, starting from the beginning of this century, is a passive scale-up resulting from the growth of funds outstanding for foreign exchange, while the corresponding growth of base money mainly comes from the “frozen” required reserves, some of which will be “unfrozen” and become excess reserves when the central bank cuts the required reserve ratio (RRR). A RRR cut can also increase the liquidity in the banking system and support money creation, but the size of the central bank’s balance sheet and base money will remain unchanged, or may even decrease in the short term, as the banks repay their loans to the central bank with the funds unleashed from the RRR cut. In contrast, the central banks in the major developed economies started their large-scale balance sheet expansion in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008, which was aimed at further injecting liquidity through quantitative easing to stimulate the economy when the normal monetary policy space was depleted. The balance sheet expansion of the central banks in the developed economies basically corresponds to an increase in excess reserves, which is essentially different from that of China. In recent years, breaking away from the passive balance sheet expansion caused by the growth of funds outstanding for foreign exchange, China’s central bank has significantly enhanced its independence in monetary policy implementation, and the role of banks as the center of money creation has been brought into full play. Since the beginning of 2020, the PBC has mainly employed the two monetary policy instruments of RRR cuts and central bank lending to cushion the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, both of which have had an effect on the central bank’s balance sheet. As the balance sheet scale-down resulting from the RRR cuts counteracts the scale-up brought about by central bank lending, the size of the central bank’s balance sheet remains basically stable while the growth rates of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are significantly higher than those in 2019. Compared with the ballooning size of the central bank balance sheets in the major developed economies, China’s central bank has maintained a normal monetary policy with a smooth transmission.One point that needs to be emphasized is that the money multiplier is the identity ratio between M2 and base money. The creation of M2 is the behavior of banks. Banks’ demand for required reserve payments after creating deposits through bank lending can be offset by the central bank’s RRR cuts, which shrink the central bank’s balance sheet, or be met by central bank lending, which expands the balance sheet. This means the money multiplier is actually an ex-post identity result and there is no direct logical relationship between the numerator and the denominator. The traditional view on the money multiplier is a mechanical observation of money creation, without a full awareness that it is commercial banks that create the money. Hence, it cannot be used to realistically analyze the money. In general, there is no intrinsic logic underlying the relationship among the size of the central bank’s balance sheet, the money multiplier, and the growth of M2. Moreover, as one of the few large economies that stick to a normal monetary policy, China does not need to inject liquidity through a large-scale expansion of its central bank’s balance sheet. Therefore, it is inappropriate to measure the effects of monetary policy simply by gauging the expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet or by the money multiplier. The key to observing the looseness or tightness of the monetary policy is to observe the money supply or the AFRE, both of which are the intermediate targets of the monetary policy. A reasonable growth of money and credit indicates that the banks’ market-based role in money creation functions well and the central bank provides a moderate amount of base money. Going forward, in line with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC will continue to adopt a sound monetary policy in a more flexible, more appropriate, and better targeted manner, do a good job in designing cross-cyclical policies, improve the mechanism of money supply management, and bring into full play the positive role of the supply of base money in promoting high-quality development of the economy. IV. The RMB exchange rate appreciated slightly, and cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow Since the beginning of 2020, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In thefirst three quarters, the RMB exchange rate appreciated slightly against a basket of currencies. At end-September, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 94.40 and 92.45, respectively, up 3.29 percent and 0.70 percent from end-2019, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), at end-September, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 2.67 percent and 2.19 percent from end-2019, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism commenced to end-September 2020, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated by 35.85 percent and 49.66 percent, respectively. In the first three quarters of 2020, the RMB exchange rate against the USD became more flexible and appreciated slightly. At end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the USD was 6.8101, up 2.44 percent from end-2019, and it appreciated by 21.53 percent on a cumulative basis from the launch of the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism in 2005. In the first three quarters of 2020, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rate against the USD was 4.25 percent. On October 27, 2020, the Secretariat of the China Foreign Exchange Market Self-Regulatory Framework announced that some quoting banks of the RMB’s central parity against the USD took the initiative to phase out in succession the use of a “counter-cyclical factor” in the quotation model of the RMB’s central parity against the USD based on their judgment of the economic fundamentals and market situations. The adjusted model was conducive to enhancing the transparency, benchmark role, and effectiveness of the central parity quotations made by the quoting banks, and it demonstrated the role of market entities in the Foreign Exchange Market Self- Regulatory Framework. Cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow with roughly balanced receipts and payments. In the first three quarters of 2020, cross-border RMB settlements totaled RMB20.8 trillion, up 44 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB10.3 trillion and RMB10.5 trillion, respectively. Cross- border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 11 percent year on year to RMB4.9 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB3.4 trillion whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and other items registered RMB1.5 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account posted RMB15.9 trillion, up 58 percent year on year.Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations Since the beginning of 2020, amid the daunting challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the PBC has adhered to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, made prompt and effective responses, and adopted a sound monetary policy in a more flexible, more appropriate, and better targeted manner. The PBC flexibly managed the intensity, pace, and focus of adjustments, remained committed to the already set combined goals of maintaining an appropriate aggregate policy, substantially lowering financing costs, and supporting the real economy in response to the great uncertainties in the environment, and went all out to ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’ s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning ofprimary-level governments, so as to create a favorable monetary and financial environment for stabilizing businesses and securing employment and to provide strong support for pandemic containment and economic recovery. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Maintaining adequate liquidity at a reasonable level in the banking system. Since the beginning of Q3 2020, in light of the current liquidity level in the banking system, financial institutions’ demand for liquidity, intensive government bond issuances, and other factors, the PBC conducted open market operations (OMOs) in a flexible manner, strengthened coordination of OMOs with mid and long-term monetary policy instruments, and maintained adequate liquidity at a reasonable level in the banking system as always, which was neither loosened nor tightened, with liquidity supply in the short, medium and long terms maintaining an equilibrium level that matched market demand. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened market communications, improved the transparency of monetary policy, and effectively stabilized market expectations by disclosing the plan of the month for Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) operations in advance in the Announcement of Open Market Operations. Guiding money market rates to move smoothly around the OMO rates. Since the beginning of Q3，the 7-day repo rate has remained unchanged at 2.20 percent on the open market, unaffected by the continuously easing monetary policies adopted by the developed economies, which steadily sends policy rate signals and demonstrates a sound monetary policy stance. In the meanwhile, the 7-day and 14-day open market operations were reasonably matched so as to iron out the short-term liquidity fluctuations caused by tax peaks, intensive government bond issuances, seasonal factors, etc., and to guide money market rates to move smoothly within a reasonable range around the OMO rates, hence reducing interest rate volatility and bringing into play the increasingly important role of OMO rates as pivotal short-term market rates. In Q3, the 7-day rate (DR007), which is the weighted average funding rate between depository institutions on the interbank market, averaged 2.15 percent, 44 basis points lower than that in Q3 2019. At end-September, the DR007 stood at 2.45 percent, 40 basis points lower than that at the same time of the previous year. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q3, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with a total amount registering RMB15billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent. Since the beginning of 2020, the PBC has conducted CBS operations once in each month, totaling RMB46 billion. The CBS operations played a positive role in improving liquidity on the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially small and medium-sized banks.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q3, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB40 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB20 billion, RMB10 billion, and RMB10 billion, respectively. In Q1–Q3 2020, the PBC issued in Hong Kong nine batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in a total amount of RMB120 billion. The regular issuance of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong not only enriched RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools on the Hong Kong market but also fostered the offshore issues of RMB-denominated bonds by both domestic and overseas financial institutions and enterprises, thus promoting the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market. According to statistics, from January to September 2020, various bond issuers other than the PBC issued over RMB99 billion of offshore RMB-denominated bonds, a year-on-year growth of 25 percent. The market would have been more willing to issue bonds without the disruption of the COVID-19 pandemic. With sustained growth in issuances, the how and where to issue RMB-denominated bondsoffshore have become increasingly diversified and market vitality has improved substantially. II. Conducting Medium-term Lending Facility and Standing Lending Facility operations Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. The reasonable supply of medium- and long-term liquidity was ensured, giving full play to the signaling and guiding functions of the mid-term policy rate. From January to September, the PBC conducted a total of RMB2.7 trillion of MLF operations, all with a maturity of one year. Specifically, the amount of MLF operations posted RMB1.7 trillion in Q3, with a net injection of medium- and long-term liquidity of RMB550 billion. At end-September, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.1 trillion, RMB410 billion more than that at the beginning of the year. The rate of the latest one-year MLF operation posted 2.95 percent, the same as that at end-June. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner. The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was met in the full amount, with the SLF playing the role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, thus promoting the smooth operation of the money market. From January to September, the PBC conducted a total of RMB157.4 billion SLF operations, of which RMB6 billion of the operations were conducted in Q3. At end-September, the balance of SLF operations registered RMB2.5 billion, and the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates were 3.05 percent, 3.2 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively, leveling off as compared with those at end-June. III. Enhancing monetary and credit support to offset the impact of the COVID- 19 pandemic To coordinate on-going pandemic containment and economic and social development, the intensity, pace, and focus of monetary policy adjustments were properly managed based on the different features of each stage. Policy measures were implemented in a more direct manner with enhanced financial support for stabilizing businesses and securing employment, with the aim of ensuring stability on six fronts and maintainingFirst, liquidity remained adequate at a reasonable level. By means of required reserve ratio (RRR) cuts, MLF operations, and open market operations, liquidity was kept adequate at a reasonable level, thereby safeguarding the stable movement of market rates and creating a favorable liquidity environment for the issue of special central government bonds and local government special bonds. RMB1.7 trillion of short-term liquidity was provided to the financial market when it reopened after the Spring Festival vacation, which effectively stabilized market expectations. The three rounds of RRR cuts in the first nine months of the year released RMB1.75 trillion of long-term funds. Second, the policies of RMB1.8 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts were rolled out and put into place, with a multi-level and multi-tier approach. At the early stage of the pandemic outbreak, on January 31, the PBC arranged a first round of special central bank lending in the amount of RMB300 billion so as to facilitate the issuance of loans for key medical and daily-necessity enterprises at preferential interest rates. The actual financing costs for enterprises dropped to below 1.6 percent after a 50-percent fiscal subsidy on the loan interest, which vigorously supported the provision of medical supplies and daily necessities. When China entered the stage of work and production resumption with preliminary containment of the pandemic, as a second step the PBC rolled out RMB500 billion of central bank lending and central bank discounts on February 26. Commercial banks issued loans at rates no higher than the one-year LPR plus 50 basis points, which forcefully supported the resumption of work and production. With remarkable achievements in pandemic control during the previous stage and at the stage of accelerated resumption of production and order, the PBC rolled out a third round of RMB1 trillion of inclusive central bank lending and central bank discounts on April 20, in an attempt to facilitate bank issuances of more loans to rural-development businesses, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and private enterprises. By keeping the average financing costs below 5.5 percent, the PBC expended all-out efforts to secure market entities. The policies of RMB300 billion of special central bank lending and RMB500 billion of central bank lending and central bank discounts were fully implemented by end-June. Over 80 percent of the RMB1 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts had been put into place by end-September, which played a vital role in supporting pandemic containment as well as supporting the resumption of work and production. Third, with highlighted characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy were proactively promoted, with the aim of stabilizing businesses, securing employment, and bolstering the development of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). On June 1, 2020, the PBC created two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy. The instrument in support of deferred repayments of inclusive MSB loans was operated on a monthly basis, providing a cumulative RMB4.7 billion of incentive funds to locally incorporated banks, and supporting a total of RMB469.5 billion of deferred principal of inclusive MSB loans from June to September. The weighted average time extension registered 12.6 months, easing the MSBs’ temporary pressures to repay the loan principal and interest. The support scheme for inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs was operated on a quarterly basis, providing a cumulative RMB93.2 billion of preferential funding to locally incorporated banks and supporting a total of RMB264.6 billion of unsecured loans for MSBs from March to September, effectively alleviating the financing strains on the MSBs. Fourth, the roles of financial institutions were brought into full play. Measures were taken to strengthen financial support for regions that were hard hit by the pandemic. Major state-owned banks were urged to ramp up support for inclusive MSBs, special credit support from policy banks was put into place, and locally incorporated banks were guided to effectively serve local communities. The financial regulatory authorities guided the financial sector to waive a part of its profits to the real economy by reducing loan interest rates through a deepened LPR reform, by implementing two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy, and by cutting charges and fees, etc. According to an estimation, a total of RMB1.25 trillion of benefits had been waived by the financial sector in favor of the real economy by end-October. With the policy effects further unfolding, the RMB1.5 trillion goal for the whole year is expected to be achieved. IV.Further improving the macroprudential policy framework The role of the macroprudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In Q3 2020, the PBC further improved the assessmentrequirements for the financing for MSBs, private firms, and the manufacturing sector in the MPA in an attempt to secure incremental financing flows to the manufacturing sector and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). The PBC improved the assessment for the use of the LPR, promoted banks to accelerate the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans, and pushed ahead with a further decline in the overall financing costs for the real sector. The foreign exchange risk reserve ratio was adjusted when appropriate. Since the beginning of 2020, the RMB exchange rate witnessed two-direction floating based on market supply and demand amid strengthened flexibility, stable market expectations, orderly cross-border capital flows, stable performance of the foreign exchange market, and balanced market demand and supply. As a result, the PBC decided to reduce the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from 20 percent to zero, effective from October 12, 2020, in a bid to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The mechanism of countercyclical capital buffer was established. In September 2020, the PBC and CBIRC jointly issued the Notice of the PBC and CBIRC on Establishing Mechanism of Countercyclical Capital Buffer (Yinfa No. 233 [2020]), stipulating the establishment of the mechanism of countercyclical capital buffer and setting the initial countercyclical capital buffer ratio at zero. Looking forward, the PBC and CBIRC will assess and adjust the countercyclical capital buffer ratio as needed, taking into account in a comprehensive manner the macroeconomic and financial conditions, the macro leverage level, the soundness of the banking system, exposure to systemic financial risks, and other factors. The development of financial holding companies was promoted with strengthened regulation. In September 2020, the State Council issued the Decisions on Implementing the Access Management of Financial Holding Companies (Guofa No. 12 [2020], hereinafter referred to as the Decisions), and the PBC promulgated the Trial Measures on Regulation of Financial Holding Companies (Order No. 4 [2020] of the People’s Bank of China, hereinafter referred to as the Measures). In line with the idea of macroprudential management and the principle of all-round, continuous, and look-through regulation, law-based market access and regulation is carried out on the basis of consolidated management of financial holding companies (FHCs), which are formed via investments by non-financial enterprises as controlling shareholders, so as to strengthen regulationof the business activities of the financial holding companies (FHC). Adhering to the principle that separate operation is the mainstream of the financial sector, the Decisions and the Measures institutionally isolated the real sector from the financial sector, which contributed to the sustainable and healthy development of the FHCs, to the prevention of risk contagion, and to a virtuous circle between the economy and finance. V.Giving full play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments The PBC actively used credit policies to support central bank lending, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policy tools to guide financial institutions to step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural people, as well as poverty alleviation. Good use was made of central bank lending to support special poverty alleviation projects to increase credit supply to areas of extreme poverty, including the “three autonomous regions,” i.e., Tibet, four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, the areas in four provinces with large Tibetan populations, and the “three autonomous prefectures,” i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, to lower the financing costs in these areas as well as to achieve targeted poverty alleviation. In Q3, RMB7.2 billion of central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects was provided, with the nationwide balance recording RMB29.1 billion at end-September. At end-September, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development registered RMB378.4 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB800.8 billion and RMB172.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB482.2 billion. In the first nine months of 2020, the PBC made a net withdrawal of PSLs in the amount of RMB103.1 billion from policy and development banks, with the net withdrawal in Q3 totaling RMB74.7 billion and the outstanding PSL registering RMB3.4343 trillion at end-September. Targeted Medium-term Lending Facilities (TMLFs) maturing in Q3 were rolled over in the form of MLF. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions to expand credit supply to MSBs and private firms at low costs. On July 15, 2020, the PBC conducted one-year MLF operations totaling RMB400 billion with a rate of 2.95 percent, which included the rollover of the TMLFs maturing in July. The instrument can roll over up to 3 years. At the end of September, the outstanding TMLFs totaled RMB296.6 billion. Box 2 Fully Implementing Monetary Policy Instruments to Enable Direct Support to the Real Economy To implement the policy arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on ensuring stability on six fronts and maintaining security in six areas, the PBC, in line with the requirements of the Report on the Work of the Government (2020), unveiled on June 1, 2020 two instruments that can directly support the real economy, namely a support instrument to defer the repayment of inclusive loans for micro and small businesses (MSBs), and a support scheme for inclusive unsecured loans to MSBs. The instruments are aimed at further improving the system of structural monetary policy instruments and beefing up financial support to keep businesses and employment stable. I. A support instrument allowing MSBs to defer repayments of inclusive loans has been introduced to effectively ease repayment pressures Amid the COVID-19 fallout, most MSMEs faced cash flow problems. To ease their pressure to repay the loan principal and interest, the PBC and the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) promptly introduced policies to defer principal and interest repayments of the loans for MSMEs, with the repayment deadline extended until March 31, 2021. Specifically, repayments of inclusive loans for MSBs eligible for this policy should all be deferred, and other businesses facing financial difficulties can negotiate with their creditors about deferred repayments. According to this policy, all inclusive loans for MSBs that are due to mature before end-2020 are eligible to apply to defer the principal and interest repayments. Banks shall approve of the MSBs’ deferred repayments as long as that in their applications they promise to keep their employment basically stable. As of end-September, 2020, principal repayments of 1.89 million market entities and interest repayments of 910 thousand market entities have been deferred by banking institutions across the country, involving RMB4.7 trillion of principal and interest of matured loans. To encourage locally incorporated banks to ensure maximum coverage of the deferred repayments policy on inclusive loans of MSBs, the PBC has launched a support instrument with the provision of funds totaling RMB40 billion. The PBC, through interest rate swap agreements signed between special purpose vehicles (SPVs) and locally incorporated banks, provides the banks with incentive funds equal to 1 percent of the total principal of inclusive MSB loans under deferred repayment. Thisinstrument is conducted on a monthly basis, and incentives totaling RMB4.7 billion have been channeled to locally incorporated banks, with inclusive MSB loan principal worth RMB469.5 billion having been deferred in repayments from June to September, covering 500 thousand MSBs. II. A support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans has been launched to effectively enhance their share In light of the MSBs’ high operational risks, banks normally require them to provide collateral guarantees before issuing them loans. Currently, unsecured loans issued by locally incorporated banks to MSBs account for only around 8 percent of their total loans. To alleviate the pains and difficulties arising from the MSBs’ lack of such guarantees and to raise the share of the unsecured MSB loans, the PBC has launched a support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans, with the provision of funds totaling RMB400 billion. The PBC provides favorable funding support for locally incorporated banks through support scheme agreements for unsecured loans signed between the SPVs and the banks. This support scheme is mainly targeted at locally incorporated banks with sound performance, and only those rated between level 1 and 5 in the PBC’s rating of financial institutions in the previous quarter can qualify as applicants. For unsecured inclusive MSB loans with a maturity of no less than 6 months that are newly issued by eligible locally incorporated banks from March 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020, the PBC provides the banks with favorable funding through the support scheme. The funding equals 40 percent of the principal of the actually issued loans, with a maturity of one year. The MSBs covered by the plan must promise to keep employment basically stable. From March to September 2020, banking institutions across the country cumulatively issued RMB2.3 trillion of inclusive unsecured loans to MSBs, a year-on-year increase of RMB796.1 billion. Specifically, loans issued by locally incorporated banks with a rate between level 1 and 5 registered RMB973.3 billion, a year-on-year increase of RMB349.9 billion. This instrument is conducted on a quarterly basis, and RMB93.2 billion of favorable funding has been provided to locally incorporated banks rated between level 1 and 5. They were supported to issue RMB264.6 billion of unsecured loans to MSBs from March to September, covering 2.33 million MSBs.III. Following market-based principles to enable targeted and direct financial support to the real economy First, they are market-based. The PBC followed the commercial principle that commercial banks are provided with autonomy in their business operations and they can undertake credit risks by themselves. Through innovations in the operational arrangements of monetary policy instruments and the design of an incentive compatibility mechanism, financial institutions are fully motivated to take the initiative to enhance financial services to MSBs. Second, they provide direct support to the real economy. Direct support does not mean the PBC directly provides funds to businesses. Instead, funding support provided by these two instruments is channeled to the real economy through financial institutions. These two instruments directly link monetary policy operations with financial support to financial institutions for MSBs. As long as MSBs commit themselves to keeping employment basically stable, and locally incorporated banks follow the rules in arranging loan deferments or in issuing unsecured loans to MSBs, these banks are eligible for PBC support, thus ensuring efficient and direct flows of funds to the real economy. Third, they are targeted. These two instruments specify the eligible targets and scope of policy support. Locally incorporated banks with MSBs as their major clients are eligible for policy support, and the scope includes deferred principal and interest repayments of the inclusive loans of MSBs and newly-issued inclusive unsecured loans to MSBs, thus ensuring precise and targeted funding support to MSBs through locally incorporated banks. Going forward, the PBC will continue to put in place these two monetary policy instruments step by step, effectively ease the MSBs’ pressures to repay loan principal and interest, increase the share of unsecured loans, and bolster financial support to keep businesses and employment stable.VI. Bringing into full play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reform By focusing its efforts on promoting high-quality development, the PBC guided financial institutions to continue to step up support to key areas and weak links in the national economy,and kept businesses and employment stable, thus ensuring that the targets and tasks for winning the battle against poverty can be met, and bringing to completion the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. First, the PBC accelerated financial support to keep businesses and employment stable. A series of meetings was held to promote financial support to keep businesses and employment stable, sustained efforts were made to strengthen credit support to MSMEs, and funding for MSMEs was promoted to achieve “an increase in quantity, a decrease in price, an improvement in quality, and an expansion in coverage.” The PBC made innovations in monetary policy instruments that can directly support the real economy, issued the Notice on Extending the Policy of Provisional Deferred Repayments of Loan Principal and Interest for Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises and Stepping up Support for Unsecured Loans of Micro and Small Businesses , clarified and improved policies, regularly monitored and issued reports, boosted media coverage and communications, and ensured policy implementation and transmission. By focusing on key support groups and key businesses, the PBC made innovations in many types of activities connecting government agencies, banks, and businesses to enable more effective and better-targeted connections. Second, the PBC made solid progress in targeted financial poverty alleviation. Areas in extreme poverty and counties that have not been lifted out of poverty were provided with stronger financial support, more financial support was channeled to industries for poverty alleviation, basic financial services in poverty-stricken areas were consolidated and enhanced, the establishment of supporting mechanisms for financial poverty alleviation was advanced, risks in financial poverty alleviation were well prevented, and the establishment of a longterm mechanism to reduce poverty by financial support was promoted. Third, the PBC continued to increase financial inputs to boost rural revitalization. Sustained financial guarantees were provided for the production of hogs and other areas, credit support to increase the area of high-standard cropland and to consolidate rural lands was promoted, the Opinions on Expanding Effective Investments in Agriculture and Rural Areas and on Accelerating the Strengthening of Prominent Weaknesses in Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Farmers were launched by the Office of the Central Leading Group for Rural Affairs with the cooperation of the PBC, financial support for effective investment in agriculture and rural areas was boosted, and financial services for new-type rural business entities and small rural households were enhanced to effectively meet their financing needs for business development.VII. Deepening the market-based interest rate reform The PBC advanced completion of the LPR reform and promoted the reduction of loan rates. First, the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans was successfully achieved. As of end-August, 92.4 percent of outstanding loans had completed the shift in the pricing benchmark. Specifically, 90 percent of the outstanding corporate loans and 99 percent of individual housing mortgage loans had completed the shift; 91 percent of the aforementioned outstanding loans were shifted to be priced with the LPR for reference. With the completion of the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans, the movements of the LPR can have an impact on most of the loans. Accordingly, the implicit floor of the loan rates was completely removed and the efficiency of the transmission of monetary policy was further enhanced, with the financing costs lowered more notably. Second, the pricing of internal funds of financial institutions became notably more market-based. With the deepening of the LPR reform, the market-based LPR has gradually replaced the benchmark loan rates as a key reference for the internal funds transfer pricing (FTP) of the commercial banks. Up to now, all the national banks have established the FTP system and have realized the linkage between the FTP and the LPR. Most of the locally incorporated financial institutions have also set up the FTP mechanism and have included the LPR in the FTP. Third, derivatives of the LPR witnessed fairly rapid development. As the pricing benchmark for outstanding loans was shifted to the LPR, basic assets pegged to the LPR will increase. There will be a rise in demand of financial institutions and enterprises for hedging against the risks brought about by LPR assets or the negative debt interest rate, with the LPR derivative transactions growing rapidly. Fourth, the LPR reform also played an important role in promoting the market-based reform of deposit rates. In September 2019, the weighted average interest rates of three-year and five-year deposits stood at 3.67 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively, down by 5 basis points and 26 basis points from last December.VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate regime The PBC continued to advance the market-based exchange rate regime reform and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of the exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. Meanwhile, the PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q3, the highest and lowest CNY central parities were 6.7591 and 7.0710, respectively against the USD. During the 66 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 42 days and depreciated on 24 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 0.59 percent (397 bps) and 0.41 percent (277 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate against other major international currencies floated in two ways. At end-September, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar and the pound had appreciated 2.44 percent and 4.48 percent, respectively, from end-2019, while the RMB had depreciated 2.23 percent and 0.53 percent against the euro and the Japanese yen. From the RMB exchange rate regime reform in 2005 to end-September 2020, the RMB against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen appreciated by a cumulative total of 21.53 percent, 25.27 percent, and 13.39 percent, respectively. Direct RMB trading was buoyant on the interbank foreign exchange market with steady liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and facilitate bilateral trade and investment.As of end-September, under the bilateral currency-swap agreements between the PBC and foreign monetary authorities, the latter utilized a total of RMB32.826 billion, and the former utilized an equivalent of USD447 million denominated in foreign currencies. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.Box 3 Advancing Toward a More Market-Based RMB Exchange RateFormation Mechanism Since 1994, the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has undergone continuous reforms so as to be more market-based. It has gradually evolved into a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. The extent to which the exchange rate is market-based has been continuously enhanced, with the market playing a decisive role in its formation. In recent years, this type of exchange rate regime has managed to withstand the test of several rounds of shocks. Efforts will be made to stick to the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism, to optimize allocation of financial resources, to enhance the flexibility of the exchange rate, and to place an emphasis on guiding expectations, in a bid to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at anadaptive and equilibrium level under the framework of a general equilibrium. 1. Current features of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism First, the PBC has exited from regular intervention, with the RMB exchange rate mainly determined by the market. During the recent two years, the PBC has greatly reduced foreign exchange interventions by enhancing the role of market forces. While giving full play to the exchange rate as a price signal, the PBC has improved the efficiency of resource allocations. Second, the RMB exchange rate has floated in two ways. From 2019 to Q3 of 2020, the RMB appreciated on 216 days and depreciated on 211 days during the 427 trading days. Recently, the RMB has appreciated, which largely reflects China’s sound economic fundamentals. As China took the lead in containing the pandemic, it became the first country to resume work and production and to return to positive economic growth. With rapid growth of exports, overseas entities have continuously increased their RMB asset holdings. Overall, the RMB exchange rate continues to move in both directions. Third, the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has managed to withstand the test of several rounds of shocks. It has maintained flexibility in the exchange rate and has given full play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. During the first nine months of 2020, the annual volatility rate of the RMB against the USD posted 4.25 percent, virtually the same as those of the other major international currencies. As of end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the USD appreciated 2.4 percent from the beginning of 2020, and the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB Index against a basket of currencies appreciated 3.3 percent, registering a fairly moderate appreciation. Over the same period, the euro and Japanese yen appreciated against the USD by approximately 4.5 percent and 3 percent, respectively. Fourth, as social expectations are stable, the foreign exchange market operates in an orderly manner. In recent years, the external environment has been getting more and more complicated. However, with strengthened expectation guidance by the PBC,expectations about the foreign exchange market remain stable. The “convergence of three prices,” namely, the central parity, the onshore price, and the offshore price, has been achieved, avoiding the impact of the exchange rate overshooting on the macro economy. The depth of the foreign exchange market has gradually been improved, and its capacity to withstand shocks has been notably enhanced. The settlement and sale of foreign exchange by banks are basically balanced, and market supply and demand remain stable. Fifth, the market-based RMB exchange rate has promoted a balance between an internal and external equilibrium. As the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate increases, the autonomy of monetary policy is enhanced. The PBC has pursued a sound monetary policy based on the domestic economic situation, avoiding a conflict in goals between an internal and external equilibrium. In this context, the RMB exchange rate has undergone orderly adjustments, reasonably reflecting changes in the supply and demand of the foreign exchange market. An automatic equilibrium in the balance of payments has been achieved, helping to strike a balance between an internal and external equilibrium. During the first half of 2020, the current account ran a surplus, while the capital account saw a deficit, exhibiting a notable pattern of two-way capital flows. On the one hand, capital inflows have increased, improving the structure of domestic asset holders. On the other hand, spontaneous capital outflows have increased. The major reason is that domestic banks have voluntarily increased their holdings of overseas assets and domestic institutions have raised the proportion of their overseas assets. This is a healthy pattern. 2. Adhering to a more market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism In terms of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism reform, the market will continue to play a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, thereby optimizing the allocation of financial resources. First, the PBC will stick to the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, as this regime is currently the most appropriate institutional arrangement for an emerging economy like China. It will continue to let the market play a role in determining the exchange rate and will avoid regular intervention in the foreign exchange market. Meanwhile, China’s trade and investment structure is becoming more diversified. Changes in the exchange rates of its major trade and investment partners are all likely to have animpact on its balance of payments and its internal and external equilibrium. With continuous reference to a basket of currencies, the role of the exchange rate in adjusting the macro economy and serving as a signal can be effectively enhanced. Second, work will be done to continuously increase the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate so as to give full play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. At present, the international environment is becoming more complicated, with notable fluctuations in the international financial market. As investors are sensitive to any expectation changes, some news may trigger sharp market fluctuations. Only through enhancing flexibility of the RMB exchange rate can China withstand the impact of the external destabilizing factors and uncertainties, thereby maintaining the autonomy of its monetary policy. Meanwhile, importance must be attached to guiding expectations so as to create conditions for the orderly operation of the foreign exchange market and for the RMB exchange rate to be kept at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Third, efforts will be made to strengthen management of the foreign exchange market. As the foreign exchange market exhibits a notable feature of heterogeneous expectations, changes in the expectations are more likely to cause a herd effect and have a substantial impact on the movements of the exchange rate. The PBC will give full play to the self-discipline mechanism of the foreign exchange market. Financial institutions are required to remain “risk neutral” and to intensify the authenticity verification of enterprises’ foreign exchange derivative transactions so as to prevent the credit risks of financial institutions brought about by enterprises conducting transactions without a real need, leveraged illegal foreign exchange trading, and speculation and arbitrage. Fourth, work will be done to strike a balance between an internal and external equilibrium and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level under the framework of a general equilibrium. The RMB exchange rate is an important link connecting the real economy with the financial sector, the domestic economy with the overseas economy, and the domestic financial market with the international financial market. It is also a key pivot for coordinating RMB and foreign exchange policies and for handling an internal and external equilibrium. As China is a super-sized emerging economy, attention must be mainly focused on domestic conditions during the formulation and implementation of monetary policy. The market-based exchange rate is conducive to enhancing the autonomy of monetarypolicy and to striking a balance between an internal and external equilibrium so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level under the framework of a general equilibrium. IX. Promoting resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner and deepening the reform of financial institutions Disposal of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions was successfully implemented. The PBC worked closely with other relevant departments and regional governments to mitigate the impact of the pandemic and delivered crucial progress and important results in the disposal of high-risk small and medium- sized financial institutions. The reform and restructuring plans of key financial institutions, including Baoshang Bank (BSB) and Jinzhou Bank, were carried out smoothly so as to ensure the smooth operation of the financial system during the critical and sensitive period and to firmly defend the bottom line so that no systemic risks should occur. Risk resolution of BSB was promoted steadily and orderly. The takeover of BSB is a key campaign in the crucial battle of preventing and defusing financial risks. It is also the first case of disposal of a distressed bank through purchase and assumption (P&A) since the establishment of the deposit insurance system in 2015. At present, the relevant business, acquired by Mengshang Bank and Huishang Bank, is operating smoothly. According to the asset and capital verification results that BSB has become seriously insolvent, a bankruptcy petition will be filed for BSB, and liquidation of the equity of the former shareholders and unguaranteed claims will be conducted in a law- based manner. In addition, the relevant departments are in the process of holding the people concerned accountable based on laws and regulations. This shows that the takeover of BSB is a decisive action and it has produced notable results, orderly eliminated the risks of BSB, successfully achieved the dual policy goals of preventing systemic risks and safeguarding financial stability, as well as preventing moral hazards and strengthening market discipline. The reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC fully promoted implementation of the reform plans fordevelopment and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and the scope of their business, improving corporate governance and constraint and incentive mechanisms, and preventing financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and, with strengthened risk prevention and control, give full play to their role in supporting key areas and weak links in the national economy during the critical period so as to better serve national development strategies. X. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Foreign exchange arrangements for trade in goods were further improved. First, the pilot program for facilitating foreign exchange receipts and payments under trade in goods was expanded to more areas. By end-September 2020, the pilot program covered 56 banks and 374 enterprises in 19 places across China. Second, redundant regulations on the current account were sorted out and removed. In August 2020, with the release of the Circular of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on Issuing Guidance for Current Account Activities (2020 Edition) (Huifa No.11 [2020]), relevant rules and regulations were brought together in this all-in-one guidebook, while regulations and redundant provisions were significantly trimmed, including the rescinding of 29 regulations. Innovative development of new forms of trade was boosted. First, individuals are now able to make trade settlement through personal foreign exchange savings accounts. Second, six banks including China CITIC Bank have been approved to conduct cross-border foreign exchange activities based on electronic transaction information. Third, companies engaged in cross-border e-commerce are allowed to make net settlement payments according to the netting between expenses on overseas warehouses, logistics, and taxes and proceeds from export sales. Fourth, domestic companies engaged in international delivery services, logistics providers, and cross- border e-commerce platforms can pay the charges in advance for overseas warehousing and logistics for their customers. Fifth, the settlement of funds for market procurement trade in 31 pilot markets across China was facilitated. Sixth, comprehensive foreign trade service providers were encouraged to collect foreign exchange receipts on behalf of their clients, which benefited over 300 providers and nearly 100,000 foreign trade MSBs. Seventh, companies can submit summary declarations of small-value foreign-related receipts and payments in their own names so as to help MSBs accumulate good credit and lower trade costs.The promotion of personal foreign exchange business was more regulated and innovative. First, facilitation of foreign exchange sales of compensation was enhanced for overseas employees of Chinese companies. As of end-September 2020, there was a total of 12,000 simplified transactions, covering USD139 million. Second, off-counter processing of foreign exchange sales and purchases for overseas studies was introduced in some commercial banks, which are not part of the annual quota for foreign exchange purchases by individuals. As of end-September, there were 1,189 relevant transactions or the equivalent of USD26.12 million. Third, the pilot program for facilitating foreign exchange sales and purchases of the compensation for foreign professionals in China was approved in five places including Beijing and Chongqing. Fourth, the plan of some banks to facilitate small-value consumption under the current account by foreign individuals in China was approved. Order in the foreign exchange market was maintained. Monitoring and analysis of potential risks incurred by cross-border fund flows were strengthened. Emphasis was placed on cracking down on illegal financial activities, such as underground banks, cross-border gambling, and illegal online foreign exchange trading, so as to ensure stability on six fronts and maintain security in six areas. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In Q3 2020, the financial market operated generally smoothly. Money market transactions were active with stable interest rates. Amid the steady recovery of the economy, the coupon rates of all types of bonds rebounded and the volume of cash bond issuances and transactions expanded remarkably. The stock market continued to pick up and it witnessed year-on-year rises in both turnover and the size of funds raised. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market transactions were active, with stable interest rates Money market interest rates went up in July and August, followed by a fall in September. In September 2020, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending and pledged repos posted 1.8 percent and 1.93 percent, respectively,down 5 basis points and up 4 basis points, respectively, from June 2020. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond repos among depository institutions posted 1.73 percent, 20 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. At end-September, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.36 percent and 2.33 percent, respectively, up 58 and 10 basis points from end-June, respectively. The market saw active repo transactions and interbank lending. In the first three quarters of 2020, the volume of trading of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB733.3 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.9 trillion and a year-on-year increase of 19.4 percent. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB116.4 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB619.1 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 2.7 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos and overnight lending accounted for 84.8 percent and 90.5 percent, respectively, of the total turnover in bond repos and interbank lending, decreasing 0.4 percentage points and 1.2 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 15.1 percent year on year to RMB206.9 trillion. The interbank CD and negotiable CD businesses operated steadily. In Q3 2020, a total of 7,147 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB5.4 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB44.3 trillion. At end- September, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB11.2 trillion. In Q3 2020, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.61 percent, 8 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 10,407 negotiable CDs was issued by financial institutions in Q3 2020, raising RMB2.0 trillion, with a decrease of RMB625.3 billion year on year. The interest rate swap market witnessed orderly development. In Q3 2020, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 72,300 transactions, increasing 14.94 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB4.66 trillion, a decrease of 7.36 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB2.83 trillion, accounting for 60.8 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 83.09 percent and 14.29 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q3 2020, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 380 transactions, with RMB56.663 billion of the notional principal.The LPR interest rate option business developed steadily. Since the LPR interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market in March, it has attracted participation by a variety of market players, covering large commercial banks, joint- stock commercial banks, city commercial banks, rural commercial banks, foreignfunded banks, securities companies, and so forth. In Q3 2020, a total of 154 interest rate option transactions were concluded, totaling RMB36.65 billion. Specifically, 6 LPR interest rate swap transactions were concluded, amounting to RMB620 million of the notional principal, and 148 were LPR interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB36.03 billion of the notional principal. 2. The coupon rate of bonds rebounded, and transactions and issuances of cash bonds expanded Government bond yields generally experienced a choppy rise. In Q3, due to the continuous improvement of economic fundamentals, the easing of risk aversion on the market, and the impact of the stock-bond seesaw effect, at end-September the yields of 1-year and 10-year government bonds posted 2.65 percent and 3.15 percent, respectively, increasing by 47 basis points and 33 basis points, respectively, from end- June. The yield curve went upward in a flattening trend.The coupon rates of bonds rallied. The coupon rate of 10-year government bonds rolled over in September 2020 was 3.08 percent, 23 basis points higher than the rate in June 2020. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by China Development Bank was 3.64 percent, 56 basis points higher than the rate in June 2020. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated non-financial enterprises was 3.71 percent, 135 basis points higher than the rate in June 2020. The volume of cash bond transactions on the interbank market saw year-on-year growth and that on the stock exchanges witnessed a significant increase. In the first three quarters of 2020, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB205.66 trillion, registering an increase of 29.03 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bond trading on the interbank market was RMB192.07 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB1.02 trillion and an increase of 25.4 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB13.59 trillion, with an increase of 119.3 percent year on year. The value of bond lending transactions stood at RMB5.66 trillion, with an increase of 74.2 percent year on year. Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In the first three quarters of 2020, the cumulative value of bond issuances totaled RMB42.44 trillion, with an increase of 25.2 percent year on year. At end-September, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB113.76 trillion, with an increase of 18.6 percent year on year. In thefirst three quarters of 2020, the cumulative value of corporate debenture bonds registered RMB10.71 trillion, increasing 38.9 percent year on year.3. Bill financing edged up, and interest rates on the bill market remained relatively stableThe bill acceptance business developed steadily. From January to September 2020, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB16.5 trillion, rising 10.1 percent year on year. At end-September, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB13.9 trillion, increasing 11.9 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances dropped slightly, an increase by RMB1.2 trillion from the beginning of the year and a decrease by RMB278.5 billion from end-June; 70.3 percent of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances were issued by MSMEs. Bill financing continued to expand, with interest rates moving upward. From January to September 2020, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB30.6 trillion, growing 13.5 percent year on year. At end-September, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.1 trillion, up 7.3 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.8 percent of the total outstanding loans, 0.3 percentage points lower year on year. In Q3 2020, interest rates on the bill market moved upward. 4. The stock market continued to grow after a rebound, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year on year The stock indices continued to climb after a rebound. At end-September, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,218 points, increasing 7.8 percent from end-June. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 12,907 points, increasing 7.6 percent from end-June. Turnover on the stock markets expanded significantly. In the first three quarters of 2020, the combined turnover of the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB158.4 trillion and the average daily turnover was RMB865.8 billion, with an increase of 58.6 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets surged year on year. In the first three quarters of 2020, a cumulative RMB803.8 billion was raised, increasing 63.6 percent year on year. 5. Growth of premium income slowed down, while growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In the first three quarters of 2020, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB3.7 trillion, with a year-on-year increase of 7.2 percent, 5 percentage points lower than the annual growth rate in 2019. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB998.9 billion, with a year-on-year increase of 6.1 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claim and benefit payments increased 7.7 percent year on year, and total life insurance claim and benefit payments went up byThe growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-September, total assets in the insurance sector increased 12.4 percent year on year to RMB22.4 trillion, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage points from end-2019. Specifically, bank deposits increased 2.3 percent year on year and investment-linked assets expanded 18.8 percent year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions fell year on year In the first three quarters of 2020, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD5.7 trillion, a decrease of 5.3 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD12.1 trillion, a decrease of 6 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD6.9 trillion, accounting for 57.3 percent of the total swap turnover. Turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD75.4 billion, rising 26.6 percent year on year. Turnover in foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD514.9 billion, rising 51.2 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 61.2 percent of the total market share.Participants on the foreign exchange market expanded continuously. At end- September, there were 726 members on the foreign exchange spot market, 258 members on the foreign exchange forward market, 252 members on the foreign exchange swap market, 208 members on the currency swap market, and 159 members on the foreign exchange options market. There were 30 market makers on the spot market and 27 market makers on the forward and swap markets. 7. The gold market operated steadily, with an overall rise in prices Gold prices increased before declining. At end-September, international gold prices closed at USD1,886.90 per ounce, representing a gain of 6.72 percent from end-June. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB402.97 per gram, increasing 1.31 percent from end-June. In the first three quarters of 2020, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 49,500 tons, representing a decrease of 9.87 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB18.94 trillion, increasing 12 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market With the implementation of the Guiding Opinions of the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC, and SAFE on Regulating the Asset Management Business of Financial Institutions, the institutional arrangements in the bond market were constantly improved. In July 2020, the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC, and SAFE jointly released the Rules for Recognition of Standard Debt-Based Assets (Announcement No. 5 [2020] of the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC and SAFE), which specified the boundaries, identification criteria, and regulatory arrangements for standard debt-based assets and non-standard debt-based assets so as to guide well-regulated market development. 2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures industry The system for securities investor protection was further enhanced. In July 2020, the Supreme People’s Court released the Provisions on Several Issues Concerning Representative Actions Arising from Securities Disputes. The Provisions make detailed stipulations on the representative action rules in the Civil Procedure Law andthe Securities Law and clarify the standardized legal proceedings for both ordinary representative actions and special representative actions. Release of the said judicial interpretation marked the official introduction of the securities class action system. Risk disposal mechanisms of securities institutions were further improved. In July 2020, the CBIRC released the Guidelines for the Side Pocket Mechanism of Publicly Offered Securities Investment Funds (for Trial Implementation), which added a side pocket mechanism as a liquidity risk management tool for publicly-offered funds. Also stipulated in the Guidelines were the triggering conditions and the implementing procedures for the side pocket mechanism as well as the primary responsibilities of fund managers and the supervisory duties of custodians. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market Regulation of the allocation of equity assets of insurance companies was improved. In July 2020, the CSRC released the Notice on Matters Concerning Improving the Regulation of the Allocation of Equity Assets of Insurance Companies, which set differentiated regulatory proportions for equity asset investments, thus guiding insurance companies to conduct investments in a prudent and sound manner. The property insurance industry was propelled to shift toward high-quality development. In July 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Issuing the Three-Year Action Plan (2020–2022) of Promoting High-Quality Development of the Property Insurance Industry, which put forward elaborate planning for the property insurance market during the following three years, including such aspects as the transformation and development of the industry, the capability to serve the national economy, society, and the people’s livelihood, the level of opening-up and international influence, as well as regulatory policies, systems, and mechanisms. Regulation was strengthened for the development of insurance asset management product businesses. In September 2020, the CBIRC released a series of supportingprovisions of the Interim Measures for the Administration of Insurance Asset Management Products, which specify time limits for product registration and extend the scope of investment assets. Regulation of the investment management capabilities of insurance institutions was improved. In September 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Issues Concerning Improving the Regulation of the Investment Management Capabilities of Insurance Institutions and designed in detail the concrete standards for insurance institutions to build various investment management capabilities. 4. Enhancing coordinated supervision of the financial infrastructure In July 2020, the PBC and CSRC jointly released Announcement No. 7 [2020] of PBC and CSRC and approved interconnectivity cooperation between the relevant infrastructure institutions in the interbank bond market and the exchange bond market. The PBC and CSRC will strengthen regulatory cooperation and coordination to boost the free flow of factors in the bond market. 5. Promoting the opening-up of the bond market In September 2020, the PBC, CSRC and SAFE jointly drafted the Announcement on Issues Concerning Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Exposure Draft), which clarifies the overall institutional arrangements for the opening-up of China’s bond market and solicits market opinions on the arrangements facilitating overseas institutional investors to allocate RMB bond assets. In September 2020, FTSE Russell announced that it would add Chinese government bonds to its World Government Bond Index (WGBI) in October 2021. So far, all of the three global major bond index providers have or are planning to include China’s bonds in their relevant indexes, which fully reflects international investors’ confidence in the long-term sound development of China’s economy and the continuous opening-up of China’s financial sector.Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments 1. Economic and financial market performance in the major economies Overall, the global economy continued to recover, with the economic indicators improving marginally in some economies, but uncertainties remained for the future given the recent resurgence of COVID-19. In October the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised its global growth forecast to –4.4 percent for 2020 and 5.2 percent for 2021, up 0.8 percentage points and down 0.2 percentage points from its June forecast, respectively. In Q3, the annualized quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth rate bounced back to 33.1 percent in the US, while the year-on-year real GDP growth in the euro area and the U.K. posted –4.4 percent and –9.6 percent, with the drop declining by 10.4 and 11.9 percentage points, respectively. The emerging market economies also showed signs of recovery. The Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) rose in the major economies, with the manufacturing PMI in the US and the euro area both rebounding to above 50. Meanwhile, as global COVID-19 cases have recently resurged and the effectiveness of a vaccine still remains to be seen, we cannot ignore the risk of a new wave of the pandemic and its impact on the stability and development of the global economy in the future. Improvements in the labor market slowed, as more and more temporary unemployment is likely to become permanent. From April to September, the US unemployment rate dropped from 14.7 percent to 7.9 percent, but research shows that, although the temporary unemployment rate declined from 11.5 percent to 2.9 percent, the permanent unemployment rate rose from 3.2 percent to 5 percent. In the meantime, the unemployment rate rose from 7.4 percent to 8.3 percent in the euro area, from 2.6 percent to 3.0 percent in Japan, and from 4.0 percent to 4.8 percent in the U.K. A differentiation in the impact of the pandemic led to a divergence in price movements. The major developed economies continued to experience low inflation, and even deflation. In September, the year-on-year growth rate of the CPI posted 1.4, 0.5, 0 percent for the US, U.K., and Japan, respectively, while the year-on-year growth rate of the HICP in the euro area was reported to be –0.3 percent. Most emerging economies still have a positive inflation, while some countries’ inflationcontinues to run high. The global stock market continued to bounce back, but volatility also became larger. In the US, the Nasdaq and the S&P 500 recovered to their pre-pandemic level in early June and late August, respectively, with the Nasdaq hitting a current-year high in September. Major stock indexes in Germany, Japan, and the U.K. all rebounded significantly from the market low in March. Emerging market stocks have improved considerably, but most countries still have not recovered to their pre-pandemic level.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major economies maintained the intensity of their accommodative monetary policies. In Q3, the US Fed, the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England (BOE), and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) kept their ultra-low interest rates and the size of their asset purchases remained unchanged, while the size of their balance sheets remained at a high level. The US Fed and the BOE continued to revise their pandemic emergency liquidity facilities, including loosening the application requirements, expanding the terms, and enhancing the coverage and strength of the facilities. Trapped by the “low growth, low inflation, and low interest rate” deadlock, the central banks in the developed economies conducted assessments of their monetary policy framework in succession. After completing its new assessment, the US Fed declared it would revise its monetary policy framework in August, aiming to achieve an inflation rate that averages 2 percent, and it stated that the response of its monetary policy to real employment would depend on the shortfalls, instead of the deviations, from the maximum employment level, and employment judgments would be made based on multiple dimensions. In addition, the ECB and the Bank of Canada began their assessments of the monetary policy framework in January and August, respectively, which are expected to be completed in 2021. The central banks in the emerging market economies continued their rate cuts. In Q3, the Mexican central bank reduced its benchmark interest rates twice by a total of 75 bps. The central banks in Brazil, Russia, South Africa, Malaysia, and Indonesia cut their rates by 25 bps.3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, the duration of the global pandemic may exceed expectations. Recently, the newly confirmed cases climbed sharply across the globe. With a rebound in the US and Europe, and the expansion accelerating in some of the developing economies, the global pandemic might continue for a rather long time and might impact the global economic recovery. Second, the risks of fiscal sustainability are worth noting. In 2020, the US fiscal deficit budget hit a record high of USD3.1 trillion, more than twice that in 2009. According to the IMF, by September the global fiscal measures responding to the pandemic were about 12 percent of global GDP, and the global public debt ratio will approach 100 percent in 2020 and might continue to rise. The IMF called on governments to improve the efficiency of their fiscal expenditures and to solve the problems of huge fiscal deficits and public debts while promoting an economic recovery. Third, hidden financial risks are rising. The performance of financial markets has deviated from the economic fundamentals. Despite the fragilities in the recovery of the real economy and the shaky outlook for company earnings, the global stock market enjoyed a strong rebound, hence the risk of a reversal in the future. Non- banking financial institutions have prominent fragilities, with a noticeable liquidity mismatch. Once the financial markets experience dramatic fluctuations, they may face huge pressures to sell and such pressures may spread to the banking system. Box 4 China’s Macro Policy Vigorously Supported its Economic Recovery In 2020, a series of monetary and fiscal policies were adopted throughout the world to cushion the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and they have played a positive role in global economic stability and recovery. To effectively support pandemic containment and to promote economic and social development, China adopted various monetary and fiscal policy measures. Overall, China’s macro policies have maintained an appropriate intensity, which provide vigorous support for shoring up the real economy, effectively filling the supply gap of medical essentials and daily necessitiesfor global pandemic containment and other industrial products due to the impact of COVID-19, and making an important contribution to the economic recovery both at home and abroad. In responding to the pandemic and supporting the economic recovery, the debt scale and the leverage ratio will inevitably go up in stages, after which the gradual recovery of the economy will make possible a reasonable macro leverage ratio for the long term. After the outbreak of COVID-19, the PBC decisively launched RMB9 trillion of monetary policy response measures, which mainly include guiding the MLF rates and the OMO rates to move downward, releasing the dividends of a market-based interest rate system through the LPR reform, freeing up RMB1.75 trillion of long-term funds with three reductions of the RRR, providing RMB1.8 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts, and launching two monetary policy tools that directly support the real economy to bolster RMB4.7 trillion for the financing of micro and small businesses (MSBs). By adopting policies such as lowering interest rates, reducing fees, and deferring principal and interest repayments, the financial system has cut RMB1.25 trillion of its profits in favor of the real economy, expecting to realize the goal of RMB1.5 trillion for the entire year. Liquidity has been maintained at an adequate and reasonable level with implementation of the monetary policy. It is expected that RMB loans will increase by approximately RMB20 trillion and the AFRE will increase by over RMB30 trillion in 2020. Broad money and the AFRE outgrew those of 2019, representing the strong support of the financial sector to the real economy. Fiscal policy continued to take effect, which alleviated the impact of the pandemic on the real economy. The fiscal deficit in 2020 went up by RMB1 trillion over the previous year, RMB1 trillion of special government bonds for pandemic containment were issued, and RMB3.75 trillion of special local government bonds were also issued, with a year-on-year increase of RMB1.6 trillion. Albeit on a large base of fiscal policy in 2019, RMB3.6 trillion of additional fiscal support was provided through the above three measures. In addition, efforts were made to provide endogenous momentum for the overall recovery of the economy and society through tax cuts and fee reductions, increased expenditures in key areas, as well as enhanced guarantees and support for major projects. In terms of the domestic situation, the intensity of China’s macro policy responses has been appropriate. Measures have been taken precisely to deliver solid outcomes, andall the announced policies have been implemented promptly and thoroughly, yielding remarkable results. First, the pandemic has been brought under control, which is the basic premise for an economic recovery. China took the lead in containment of the pandemic among the major economies, cutting the daily increase in domestic coronavirus cases to single digits within about two months. The adoption of appropriate and reasonable macro policy measures is expected to vigorously bolster the economic recovery. In contrast, if the pandemic had not been effectively contained, an even stronger macro policy would not have fundamentally cushioned its devastating impact on the economy. Second, in accordance with the pace of the pandemic containment efforts, macro policy measures have been rolled out gradually at different levels based on the characteristics of pandemic containment and recovery of the economy and society at different stages. The macro policy took different focuses in the various stages of pandemic containment, which secured the provision of medical supplies and daily necessities, fostered the resumption of work and production, and speedily restored normal production and life. Third, as for policy implementation, China’s macro policies have been targeted precisely instead of indiscriminately injecting large amounts of liquidity. The PBC launched two monetary policy instruments that provide direct support for the real economy, i.e., an instrument supporting deferred repayments of inclusive MSB loans, and a support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans. The fiscal sector set up a new transfer payment mechanism to ensure that funds go straight to prefecture- and county-level governments, and it issued special government bonds for COVID-19 control to support pandemic containment and local infrastructure construction. Fourth, from the perspective of policy effects, China's economic and social development has been restored in a comprehensive manner. China’s GDP dropped by 6.8 percent in Q1, but grew by 3.2 percent and 4.9 percent in Q2 and Q3, respectively. China’s economy resumed positive growth during the first three quarters, with economic indicators, including consumption, investment, export, etc., picking up. From a global perspective, China’s macro policy responses have also maintained an appropriate intensity, which support a swift recovery of the economy and make an important contribution to the world economy. First, they have forestalled further contraction of the world economy. According to the IMF forecast, the world economy has been witnessing the worst recession since World War II, and it is expected to contract by 4.4 percent in 2020. China is the only one among the major economies to maintain a positive growth rate. It would not be possible to realize positive growth for the world economy in 2020 and 2021 as a whole without the positive growth of the Chinese economy. Second, China’s economic growth will have positive spillovereffects in the world, especially in fostering an economic recovery of its neighboring countries and its major trade partners. Third, amid the impact of the pandemic, China to some extent, has played the role of global supplier of the last resort, and it has established a foundation for pandemic containment as well as for an economic recovery throughout the world. China’s rapid resumption of production has filled the global supply gap of medical essentials and daily necessities for battling COVID-19 and other industrial production that has been impacted by the pandemic. It has provided massive essential supplies and intermediate goods necessary for a resumption of production to the world, and it has made a critical contribution to global pandemic containment and restoration of global industrial chains.II. Macroeconomic developments in China In the first three quarters of 2020, facing the severe shocks from COVID-19 and the complex situations at home and abroad, departments in all regions coordinated regular containment of the pandemic and economic and social development in a scientific way and vigorously and effectively promoted a resumption of production and order. As a result, the national economy continued to recover steadily. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in the first three quarters grew by 0.7 percent year on year on a comparable basis to RMB72.3 trillion, the growth of which turned positive. Specifically, GDP in Q3 grew by 4.9 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, CPI rose by 3.3 percent year on year. 1. Consumption gradually improved, and the growth of investments and foreign trade turned positive The growth of residents’ income in real terms turned positive and there was a gradually improving willingness to consume gradually. In the first three quarters, per capita disposable income registered RMB23,781, up 3.9 percent year on year in nominal terms. It grew by 0.6 percent in real terms year on year, registering positive growth for the first time in 2020. Residents’ income from wages and salaries remained stable, and growth of the per capita income of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q3, 23.5 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” up 0.2 percentage points from the previous quarter. In the first three quarters, total retail sales of consumer goods registered RMB27.3 trillion, down 7.2 percent year on year and a deceleration of 4.2 percentage points from H1 of 2020. In particular, growth in Q3 grew by 0.9 percent, registering positive quarterly growth for the first time in 2020. Sales of upgraded consumer goods and online retail sales continued to grow rapidly.The growth of fixed-asset investments turned positive, and investments in the hightech industry and social areas continued to rebound. In the first three quarters, total fixed-asset investments (excluding those by rural households) increased by 0.8 percent year on year to RMB43.7 trillion, registering positive growth for the first time in 2020. Current investments have exhibited the following characteristics. First, investments in the manufacturing sector and the infrastructure rebounded remarkably. The growth of investments in infrastructure turned positive for the first time in 2020, registering 0.2 percent in the first three quarters. In the first three quarters, investments in the manufacturing sector declined by 6.5 percent, a deceleration of 5.2 percentage points from H1, while private investments decreased by 1.5 percent to RMB24.4 trillion, a deceleration of 5.8 percentage points from H1. Second, the growth of investments in the high-tech industry accelerated. In the first three quarters, investments in the hightech industry grew by 9.1 percent, an acceleration of 2.8 percentage points from H1. Third, investments in social areas rebounded. In the first three quarters, investments in social areas increased by 9.2 percent, an acceleration of 3.9 percentage points from H1. Specifically, investments in the areas of health care and education grew by 20.3 percent and 12.7 percent, respectively. Imports and exports outperformed expectations, and the trade structure continued to improve. In the first three quarters, imports and exports grew by 0.7 percent year on year, an acceleration of 3.9 percentage points from H1. Specifically, imports and exports in Q3 grew by 7.5 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, the growth of exports registered 1.8 percent, 4.8 percentage points higher than that in H1, while imports decreased by 0.6 percent, a deceleration of 2.7 percentage points from H1. As a result, there was a trade surplus of RMB2.3 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, and the share of imports and exports under general trade and in the private sector increased. In terms of the commodities structure, the share of exports of machinery and electronics in total exports increased somewhat, and exports of medical equipment and supplies related to pandemic containment grew rapidly. In terms of trade partners, ASEAN became China’s largest trade partner. In the first three quarters, China’s trading volume with ASEAN grew by 7.7 percent to RMB3.38 trillion, accounting for 14.6 percent of the total volume of China’s foreign trade, up 0.9 percentage points from the same period of 2019. The concentration of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the high-tech industry accelerated. In the first three quarters, actually utilized FDI increased by 5.2 percentyear on year to RMB718.81 billion, the growth of which turned positive. Specifically, the growth of actually utilized FDI in Q3 posted 20.4 percent, far outpacing the –10.8 percent in Q1 and the 8.4 percent in Q2. In terms of the industrial distribution, the concentration of FDI in the high-tech industry accelerated. In the first three quarters, actually utilized foreign investment in the high-tech service industry grew by 26.4 percent year on year. In the first three quarters, non-financial outward direct investments by domestic investors edged down by 0.6 percent year on year to RMB551.51 billion, registering a slight deceleration. Specifically, non-financial outward direct investments in the countries along the Belt and Road reached USD13.02 billion, up 29.7 percent year on year. In particular, outward investments in the leasing/commercial services industry and the wholesale/retail industry witnessed year-on-year growth of 18.6 percent and 41.1 percent, respectively. 2. Agricultural production was fairly satisfactory, industrial production accelerated, and the service industry recovered steadily The share of tertiary industry in total industry continued to increase. In the first three quarters, the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 2.3 percent, 0.9 percent, and 0.4 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 6.7 percent, 37.9 percent, and 55.4 percent of GDP. The share of the tertiary industry in total industry surpassed that of the secondary industry by 17.5 percentage points, up 1.2 percentage points from the same period of 2019. Agricultural production was fairly satisfactory. In the first three quarters, the value- added of agriculture grew by 3.8 percent year on year, which was on par with that in H1. Specifically, the value-added of agriculture in Q3 grew by 3.9 percent. As the sowing areas of autumn crops increased amidst stability and the major autumn crops on the whole grew well, it was expected that there would be another bumper autumn crop harvest . Hog production capacity gradually rebounded. At end-Q3, hogs in stock grew by 20.7 percent year on year to total 370.39 million. Industrial production accelerated. The value-added of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) in the first three quarters increased by 1.2 percent year on year, while that in H1 decreased by 1.3 percent. Specifically, IEDS grew by 5.8percent in Q3, accelerating by 1.4 percentage points from Q2. According to a survey of 5,000 entrepreneurs, conducted in Q3 by the PBC, the Business Climate Index and the Profitability Index posted 49.4 percent and 57.0 percent, respectively, up 6.6 percentage points and 7.3 percentage points from Q2. The service industry recovered steadily, and the modern service industry showed sound growth momentum. In Q3, the value-added of the service industry grew by 4.3 percent year on year, accelerating by 2.4 percentage points from Q2. In the first three quarters, the Index of Service Production (ISP) fell by 2.6 percent year on year, decelerating by 3.5 percentage points from H1. In September, the Commercial Activities Indexes for transportation, telecommunications/Internet software, and the accommodations/catering industries remained above 60 percent. The Expected Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 62.2 percent, up 0.9 percentage points from that in August, demonstrating the stronger confidence of enterprises in the development of the market. 3. The growth of consumer prices decelerated slightly, and the decline in producer prices narrowed The growth of consumer prices decelerated slightly. In Q3, the CPI rose by 2.3 percent year on year, witnessing a deceleration of 0.4 percentage points from the previous quarter. Specifically, CPI growth registered 2.7 percent, 2.4 percent, and 1.7 percent in July, August, and September, respectively. Due to factors such as the stabilization of pork prices and the base figure effect, the growth of food prices decelerated by 1.4 percentage points from Q2, registering year-on-year growth of 10.8 percent in Q3. The growth of non-food prices decelerated slightly, with the prices of consumer goods and services both decelerating. The decline in producer prices decelerated. In Q3, the Producer Price Index (PPI) dropped by 2.2 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.1 percentage points compared with Q2. Specifically, the year-on-year decline of producer prices in July, August, and September dropped by 2.4 percent, 2.0 percent, and 2.1 percent, respectively. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) dropped by 2.7 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.7 percentage points from the previous quarter. In the first three quarters, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC decreased by 1.4 percent year on year, which was on par with that in H1.4. The decline of fiscal revenue decelerated, and employment was generally stable The decline of fiscal revenue decelerated. In the first three quarters, revenue in the national general public budget dropped by 6.4 percent year on year to RMB14.1 trillion, decelerating by 4.4 percentage points compared with H1. Specifically, tax revenue amounted to RMB11.9 trillion, down 6.4 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue reached RMB2.2 trillion, down 6.7 percent year on year. The domestic value- added tax, domestic consumption tax, and business income tax dropped by 13.5 percent, 5 percent, and 4.9 percent year on year, respectively, while the personal income tax increased by 7.3 percent year on year. Fiscal expenditures rebounded gradually. In the first three quarters, expenditures in the national general budget saw a decline of 1.9 percent year on year to RMB17.5 trillion. Growth accelerated by 3.9 percentage points compared with H1 and decelerated by 11.3 percentage points from the same period of 2019. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures related to health care and social security/employment grew steadily, registering year-on-year growth of 4 percent and 8.2 percent, respectively. Expenditures in the business/services industry and resource exploration/industrial information and other areas rose substantially, registering year- on-year growth of 24.5 percent and 20.9 percent, respectively. In the first three quarters, budgetary revenue from nationwide government-managed funds totaled RMB5.5 trillion, up 3.8 percent year on year. Specifically, revenue from land sales rose by 10.3 percent year on year. Budgetary expenditures from nationwide government-managed funds increased by 26.6 percent year on year to RMB7.8 trillion. Employment was generally stable. In the first three quarters, 8.98 million people were newly employed, accomplishing 99.8 percent of the annual target. In September, the surveyed unemployment rate in urban areas was 5.4 percent, down 0.2 percentage points from August. Specifically, the unemployment rate of the surveyed employees between the ages of 25 and 59 years old posted 4.8 percent, 0.6 percentage points lower than that in the urban areas, on par with that in August. The average weekly working hours of employees of enterprises were 46.8 hours, increasing by 0.1 hour year on year. As of end-Q3, the number of rural migrants decreased by 2.1 percent year on year to 179.52 million, down 3.84 million from the same period of 2019.5. The balance of payments and external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. According to preliminary statistics, China’s current account surplus stood at USD170.7 billion in the first three quarters. To be specific, the surplus in trade in goods was USD339.8 billion, whereas the deficit in trade in services was USD116.9 billion. Under the capital and financial account, the surplus in direct investments reached USD44.9 billion. At end-September, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.1426 trillion, increasing by USD34.6 billion from end-2019. At end-June, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.1324 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt balance was USD1.2234 trillion, accounting for 57 percent of the total external debt balance. 6. Analysis by sector 6.1 The real estate sector In Q3 2020, nationwide housing prices remained generally stable. Housing sales and investments in real estate development gradually recovered. In September, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built housing prices increased by 4.5 percent year on year, decelerating 0.4 percentage points from those in June. Second-hand residential housing prices increased by 2.2 percent year on year, basically on par with those in June. In the first three quarters, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 1.8 percent year on year, while housing sales increased by 3.7 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development gradually recovered. In the first three quarters, investments in real estate development grew by 5.6 percent year on year, accelerating by 3.7 percentage points from H1. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 6.1 percent year on year, registering an acceleration of 3.5 percentage points from H1, accounting for 74.0 percent of total investments in real estate development.The growth of real estate loans continued to decelerate. At end-September, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) stood at RMB48.8 trillion, up 12.8 percent year on year and a deceleration of 0.3 percentage points from end-June. Outstanding real estate loans made up 28.8 percent of the total lending balance. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans amounted to RMB33.7 trillion, up 15.6 percent year on year, representing a deceleration of 0.1 percentage points from end-June. Outstanding housing development loans posted RMB9.3 trillion, a rise of 11.4 percent year on year and a deceleration of 0.6 percentage points from end-June. 6.2 The civil aviation sector In recent years, the civil aviation industry in China has seen rapid growth with an expanding industrial scale. There has been marked improvement in aviation safety, steady enhancement in the quality of development, and continuous enhancement of transport efficiency and the security capability of this industry, and it is playing a more important role in society. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic hit the civil aviation industry severely. The CBRC, jointly with the PBC and the Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), introduced a special support policy of emergency loans for aviation enterprises locked in difficulties. In line with the principle of adopting differentiated measures and providing a credit supply with precision, the PBC provided special central bank lending, and the development banks and large banks issued preferential loans to bail out some of the troubled civil aviation enterprises. These measures effectively cushioned the impact of the pandemic and helped enterprises tide over the difficulties. As significant strategic results were achieved in coordinating pandemic containment with economic and social development, the civil aviation industry showed an overall rebounding trend. First,the transport and operation of the civil aviation industry recovered steadily. In Q3, total transport turnover of the civil aviation industry decreased by 32.4 percent year on year, decelerating by 14.2 percentage points and 19.3 percentage points from Q1 and Q2, respectively. Second, passenger traffic and cargo/mail traffic continued to rebound. Passenger traffic decreased by 24.0 percent year on year, decelerating by 30.0 percentage points and 30.5 percentage points from Q1 and Q2, respectively. Cargo and mail traffic decreased by 8.8 percent year on year, decelerating by 8.6 percentage points and 3.6 percentage points from Q1 and Q2, respectively. Third, transport efficiency continuously increased. In the first three quarters, with the gradual recovery of demand in the civil aviation market, the passenger load factor for scheduled flights, the weight load factor for scheduled flights, and the average daily use rate of aircraft decreased by 11.6 percent, 5.5 percent, and 3.4 percent, respectively, decelerating by 3.2 percentage points, 1.6 percentage points, and 0.7 percentage points from H1, respectively.Meanwhile, the development of China’s civil aviation industry still faces multiple challenges. First, factors such as the improper distribution of airspace resources, fairly slow development of infrastructure construction, a shortage of professionals, uncompetitive enterprises, and an inefficient management system have restricted the sustainable development of the civil aviation industry. Second, pressures of energy savings and environmental protection on the civil aviation industry are increasing, and the tasks of changing the development mode and realizing green and low-carbondevelopment are becoming more arduous. Third, the surging growth of e-commerce, delivery, and modern logistics has put forward higher requirements on air cargo. Fourth, due to the lack of a growth momentum in the global economy and trade, rising protectionism, and geopolitical tensions, plus the fallout from COVID-19, competition in terms of transport services in the civil aviation industry is becoming fiercer around the world. Going forward, efforts should be made to build a safe, convenient, efficient and green modern civil aviation system while continuing to contain the pandemic. On the one hand, efforts should be made to strengthen the planning and construction of airports, to reasonably utilize airspace and other resources, to scientifically plan and arrange domestic route networks, to promote the development of air cargo facilities, and to continuously enhance the quality of transport services and aviation safety. On the other hand, efforts should also be made to deepen the reform of the civil aviation industry, to enhance its ability to innovate, to strengthen personnel training, to accelerate construction of a green civil aviation, and to enhance international competitiveness. Part 5 Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy Since the beginning of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has dealt a heavy blow to China’s economic and social development. Under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee, the entire nation has worked as one and has achieved significant results in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development. Economic growth has been better than expected, the balance between supply and demand has gradually improved, and the market has seen more vitality and stronger growth drivers. Economic growth in Q1–Q3 turned from negative to positive, with growth in Q3 recording 4.9 percent, making it highly probable that the economy will see positive growth for 2020. Looking beyond the near term, the fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run and high-quality development remain unchanged.At present, China has entered a stage of high-quality development, and there are numerous advantages and conditions sustaining its future development. The pandemic containment and economic recovery in China are among the fastest in the world. With demand mostly having recovered and supply growing at a faster pace, employment and the people’s well-being are secured, and market expectations are generally stable. According to forecasts by the IMF, China will be the only major economy to record positive growth in 2020. In the current and next period, China’s development is still at an important stage of strategic opportunities. The economy still has great potential, strong resilience and vitality, and ample room for maneuver. With the deepening of the supply-side structural reforms as well as the full implementation of the innovation-driven development strategy and the strategy of expanding domestic demand, various new industries, business models and growth drivers are taking shape and rapidly developing. The numerous advantages and conditions supporting longterm growth remain unchanged. The financial sector has continuously enhanced its support for the real economy, especially for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and private businesses. With prudent and decisive measures to prevent and control financial risks, the financial system has been generally sound and capable of defusing various risks. The RMB exchange rate has been basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and the foreign exchange reserves remained above USD3 trillion. The economy has strengthened its capability to address external shocks. As the global environment becomes more complex, instabilities and uncertainties have increased significantly, posing numerous challenges for the domestic economy. Since Q3, recovery has been weak in the major economies. As the pandemic has resurged in some economies, the public sectors and industries have been exposed to rising debt, which seriously undermined the sustainability of fiscal policies. Capital market prices are detached from economic fundamentals, and excessively loose monetary policies have led to spillovers. Meanwhile, with protectionism and unilateralism gaining ground, geopolitical tensions have resurfaced and trade frictions among some countries are intensifying. Global industrial and supply chains are suffering from the severe impact of non-economic factors, causing major instabilities and uncertainties in economic recovery. As such, China is still under great pressures in preventing imported infection and risks related to the global economy and financial markets. To offset the impact of the pandemic, countercyclical adjustments increased in H1, and the macro leverage ratio displayed a temporary rise. Looking forward, however, the macro leverage ratio is likely to stabilize as economic growth gradually returns to its potential levels. In addition, the time lag between thepandemic outbreak and the attendant financial risks places upward pressures on future nonperforming loans. With regard to structural, institutional and cyclical concerns in the economy, as well as prominent issues of uneven development and underdevelopment, it is necessary to develop a deep understanding and dialectical view, and to enhance opportunity and risk awareness. The PBC will focus on taking care of its own matters by properly handling the relationship between reforms and macro-management, short-term and long-term considerations as well as internal and external equilibrium, so as to achieve high-quality development. Consumer price growth continued its overall downward trend, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. In July and August 2020, due to the impact of floods in some provinces, the prices of meat and vegetables saw a rebound. But as multiple measures were taken by government departments to guarantee supply and stabilize prices and monetary policy remained sound, prices have recently declined. CPI growth in September fell to below 2 percent. According to preliminary estimates, the average growth of the CPI in 2020 will fall within a reasonable range. Industrial production continued to recover, with domestic and external demand gradually regaining ground. The PPI recorded positive monthly growth throughout Q3, while its negative year-on-year growth exhibited an overall narrowing trend. However, as the global pandemic unfolds, in light of the uncertain impact of the containment measures on supply chains, as well as the base effect and holiday disruptions on the CPI, it is necessary to pay close attention to short-term price movements. From medium and long-term perspectives, China’s economic performance is generally stable, aggregate supply and demand are basically in equilibrium, the supply-side structural reforms are being further advanced, the market mechanism is playing a better role, monetary policies remain sound, and monetary conditions are reasonable and adequate, providing no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, the PBC will continue to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and resolutely implement the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. It will coordinate ongoing pandemic control with economic and social development, and it will make every effort to ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment andexpectations, to maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, people's basic livelihood, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains and the normal functioning of primary-level governments, and to successfully wrap up the 13th Five-Year Plan, thereby giving utmost support to achieving the target of completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. At the same time, the PBC will focus on thoroughly implementing the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee by understanding the new development stage, applying the new development philosophy, establishing the new development paradigm, improving macroeconomic governance, conducting cross-cyclical policy design, and promoting a balance of economic aggregates, structural optimization as well as both internal and external equilibria. Moreover, work will be done to build a modern central banking system, to improve the mechanism of money supply management, to enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, and to build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the economy. The sound monetary policy will be more flexible, appropriate and targeted, better adapted to the needs of high-quality economic development, and more focused on the quality and efficiency of the provision of financial services for the real economy. The PBC will improve the mechanism of money supply management to manage scientifically the intensity, pace and focus of monetary policy operations in line with the macro situation and market needs. By so doing, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level to avoid a liquidity crunch in the market while firmly refraining from adopting broad and indiscriminate stimulus measures so that a liquidity spillover will not occur. The PBC will work to enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, deepen the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, continue to unleash the potential of reform in lowering lending rates, adopt a combination of policies to significantly reduce social financing costs, and give play to the decisive role of the market in the RMB exchange rate formation. The role of structural monetary policy tools in targeted liquidity provision will be enhanced so that policy measures can provide more direct support for the real economy. The PBC will attach importance to managing expectations and keeping prices stable. It will properly handle the relationship between internal and external equilibria and that between short-term and long-term goals, conduct a normal monetary policy as long as possible, and keep the macro leverage ratio basically stable. Efforts will be made to fight the tough battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks, to improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warnings, resolution and accountability, and to safeguard financial security by firmly defending the bottom line that no systemic riskshould occur. Work will be done to guide and create new demand with innovations and high-quality supply and to accelerate the establishment of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulation reinforcing each other. First, the PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is more flexible, appropriate and targeted. It will improve the mechanism of money supply management and employ a mix of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), open market operations (OMOs), central bank lending, and central bank discounts to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to properly control the general valve of money supply, so that the growth rates of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be basically in line with that of nominal GDP which reflects potential output, thereby supporting the return of the economy to its potential growth rate. Work will be done to guide the market rates to move smoothly around OMO rates and MLF rates. Moreover, the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment will be improved, with increased support for the issuance by small and medium-sized banks of capital replenishment instruments, such as perpetual bonds, so that banks will be better able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Measures will be taken to improve macroeconomic governance, to optimize monetary policy objectives as well as fiscal, employment, industry, investment, consumption, environmental protection, regional and other policy objectives, and to promote a reasonable division of duties and an efficient synergy. Second, to strengthen financial support for stabilizing businesses and securing employment, the PBC will move further ahead with the implementation of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy, and will effectively bring into play their propelling force. It will maintain the stability of central bank lending and central bank discount policies while providing inclusive and sustained financing support for agro-linked enterprises, micro and small businesses (MSBs), private enterprises, and industries severely affected by the pandemic. Active steps will be taken to promote the two monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy, to improve the effectiveness of targeted adjustments, and to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to step up credit support for inclusive MSBs that keep their employment basically stable. Concrete efforts will be made to alleviate the pressures on MSBs caused by principal and interest repayments and to ease their financing difficulties. The financial sector will be guided to meet the target of givingThird, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. It will innovate and improve the system of structural monetary policy tools, design the incentive compatibility mechanism in a targeted way, and guide financial institutions to ramp up support for those fields in conformity with the new development philosophy. Work will be done to improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, to promote the industrialization and large-scale application of new technologies, and to develop fund chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby giving rise to a virtuous cycle and triangular interactions among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector, and industries. The PBC will push ahead with the regulated development and innovation of supply chain finance by implementing supporting policies step by step in collaboration with the relevant agencies and providing targeted services to support the completeness and stability of supply chains and industrial chains. The rural financial services system will be improved. Research will be conducted on the linkup between financial support for poverty eradication and rural revitalization policies. Work will be accelerated to roll out measures for the assessment of the services of commercial banks for rural revitalization. The PBC will urge commercial banks to improve their internal resource allocations as well as their performance assessments. Measures will be taken to establish and improve the long-term mechanism for increasing bank lending to MSBs, to guide financial institutions to step up credit support for MSBs, private enterprises, the agricultural sector, rural areas, farmers as well as the manufacturing sector, to enhance Fintech, and to reinforce financial inclusion. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices as well as expectations, maintain the continuity, consistency and stability of real estate finance policies, and effectively implement rules for the prudential management of real estate finance. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform and the exchange rate reform to increase the efficiency of financial resource allocations. It will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, with the LPR reform continuing to go deeper. The market-oriented LPR pricing mechanism will be consolidated. The PBC will urge financial institutions to better incorporate the LPR into the funds transfer pricing (FTP) of loans and to strengthen the interconnections between the LPR and both the internal and external pricing of loans, thereby further bringing down the financing costs by means of reform and increasing the efficiency of monetary policy transmission. The selfregulatory mechanism for market rate pricing will play its part in regulating the conduct of deposit rate pricing and in reinforcing the requirement that lending entities of all types give explicit indications of annualized loan rates, in a move to maintain the fairness of pricing, safeguard a level playing field in the market, and protect the rights and interests of consumers. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, maintain the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and explore the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. Work will be done to stabilize market expectations and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Development of the foreign exchange market will pick up pace. Enterprises will be guided to be neutral in financial management and manage exchange rate risks with foreign exchange derivatives, while financial institutions will be guided to always be risk neutral and to provide services of exchange rate risk management for import and export companies with authentic needs. The PBC will steadily advance the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and further facilitate the use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment. Fifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental institution building in financial markets so that they can play an effective role in stabilizing growth, promoting structural adjustments, advancing reform, and guarding against risks. Active steps will be taken to improve the bond market management system and push for the unification of standards for information disclosures regarding corporate debenture bonds. The mechanism of bond default risk prevention and resolution will be improved in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. The PBC will enhance coordinated regulation over financial market infrastructures, put into practice the arrangements for interconnectivity between bond market infrastructures, and continue to push forward with the building of custodian banks and trade repositories so as to ensure that financial markets are generally safe and stable while performing efficiently. Active but prudent steps will be taken to promote the opening-up of the bond market. In terms of bond market access, channels will be integrated and procedures will be optimized so that the environment for overseas investors will be more friendly and convenient.Sixth, the PBC will push further ahead with the reform of financial institutions and make continued efforts to improve corporate governance and optimize financial supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, the reform of state-owned commercial banks will go deeper, and a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics will be established to increase efficiency and provide better services for MSBs and private enterprises. Work will be done to support the sustainable and sound development of small and medium-sized banks and rural credit cooperatives by improving monetary, regulatory and tax rules so that they can reassume their roles in serving local needs and their original purposes. An effective mechanism of checks and balances in governance will be established, and the long-term mechanism for capital replenishment will be improved. Measures will be taken to reform and optimize the policy financial sector by carrying out separate account management of businesses as well as classified accounting in a move to enhance their capacity to support the national strategy. Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warnings, resolution and accountability. It will safeguard financial security and fight the tough battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. The system of financial risk prevention and early warnings will be improved, and stress tests fully covering the banking system will be conducted. To improve the soundness of financial institutions and their sustainable management capacity, the PBC will support banks, particularly small and medium-sized banks, to replenish capital through multiple channels and improve their governance, and to step up efforts to set aside loss provisions for non- performing loans and carry out write-offs. Work will be done vigorously to develop regulatory technologies and enhance the professionalism, effectiveness and seriousness of regulation. While the endeavors to defuse risks will be advanced prudently, under no circumstances will local risks be allowed to evolve into systemic risks, nor will regional risks be allowed to evolve into national risks. Meanwhile, the PBC will accelerate steps to improve the system of accountability for financial risk resolution so as to ensure that shareholders, creditors of different types, local governments and financial regulatory agencies assume their respective responsibilities. Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2020, the People's Bank of China (PBC) has resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Under a sound monetary policy which is more flexible, appropriate and targeted, this year witnessed a reasonable growth in money and credit and aggregate financing, a further improved structure, and a significant drop in overall financing costs for enterprises. Buttressed by the realization of monetary policy goals, China took the lead in pandemic containment and the resumption of work and production, and became the first economy to post positive growth. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In 2020, amid the impact of the pandemic and the complicated economic conditions at home and abroad, there was much more uncertainty about liquidity demand and supply in the banking system. Based on the characteristics of pandemic containment and recovery of the economy and society at different stages, the PBC timely adjusted the intensity and pace, and comprehensively used rich policy tools, to keep the total liquidity in line with market demands, including reserve requirement ratio (RRR) cuts, central bank lending, central bank discounts, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), and open market operations (OMOs). These measures not only helped ensure stable performance of the financial system and satisfy emergency demands for liquidity arising from guaranteeing supplies and resuming work and production during the outbreak of the pandemic but also gradually restored total liquidity to its normal level during the course of the economic and social recovery. In the meanwhile, by announcing monetary policy arrangements in advance and other means, the PBC strengthened expectation management and ironed out short-term disturbances in a timely manner. Money-market interest rates were guided to move around the OMO rates, and policy rates were fully exploited as a pivot. Stable market expectations enabled financial institutions to trim down their preventive demands for liquidity. At end-December, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 2.2 percent, down 0.3 percentage points from the end of the previous year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the credit structure optimized and the lending rates moving downwards Credit provided stronger support for the real economy at a reasonable pace. Outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 12.5 percent year on year to RMB178.4 trillion at end-2020, increasing RMB19.8 trillion from the beginning of the year and RMB3.0 trillion more than the increase in the corresponding period of 2019. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 12.8 percent year on year to RMB172.7 trillion, up RMB19.6 trillion from the beginning of the year and an increase that was RMB2.8 trillion larger than that during the corresponding period of the previous year. In response to the pandemic, financial institutions increased their loans in the first half of 2020, especially in the first quarter. After the economy gradually recovered, credit expansion returned to normal, and it changed in small increments during the second half of 2020, basically flat compared with the previous year. Over the past four quarters of 2020, loans increased RMB7.1 trillion, RMB5.0 trillion, RMB4.2 trillion, RMB3.4 trillion respectively, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.3 trillion, RMB1.1 trillion, RMB211.1 billion, RMB191.1 billion, stabilizing quarter by quarter. The credit structure continued to be optimized. Medium and long-term loans to themanufacturing sector and loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) recorded a rapid growth. At end-2020, loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB12.2 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB2.7 trillion. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector gained 35.2 percent, accelerating for fourteen consecutive months. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 30.3 percent year on year to RMB15.1 trillion, 7.2 percentage points higher than that at end-2019. These loans supported 32.28 million MSBs, an increase of 19.4 percent year on year. In 2020, inclusive loans to MSBs increased by RMB3.5 trillion, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion. The weighted average interest rates on loans hit a record low. In 2020, with the deepening of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, the implicit floor of loan rates was completely removed and the efficiency of the transmission of monetary policy was further enhanced. The low lending rates created favorable conditions for financial institutions to waive profits of RMB1.5 trillion in favor of the real economy. In December 2020, the one-year LPR fell by 0.3 percentage points from December 2019 to 3.85 percent, and the over-five-year LPR fell by 0.15 percentage points to 4.65 percent. The weighted average lending rate recorded 5.03 percent, down 0.41 percentage points year on year, falling to a record low. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 5.30 percent, down 0.44 percentage points year on year. The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.51 percentage points from December 2019 to 4.61 percent, a drop clearly exceeding that of the LPR, breaking the record for the second successive month. This shows the role that the LPR plays in indicating direction and guidance. In December 2020, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 66.04 percent, 7.02 percent, and 26.93 percent, respectively. In general, the upward and downward float of the loan rates around the LPR moved downward as a whole compared with that in December 2019.The sustained easy monetary policies of the developed economies prompted a decrease in the interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans. In December 2020, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.16 percent and 0.59 percent, respectively, down 0.14 percentage points and 1.34 percentage points year on year. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.22 percent and 1.36 percent, down 1.79 percentage points and 1.65 percentage points year on year, respectivelyDeposits grew rapidly. At end-2020, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB218.4 trillion, up 10.2 percent year on year, 1.6 percentage points higher than those at the end of the previous year. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB212.6 trillion, up 10.2 percent year on year, 1.5 percentage points higher than those at the end of the previous year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD889.3 billion, an increase of USD131.5 billion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of USD101.3 billion year on year. Box 1 Strengthening Deposit Management and Safeguarding Competitive Order in the Deposit Market Safeguarding competitive order in the deposit market is conducive to maintaining a reasonable and stable cost for financial institutions to assume debt, cutting down on social financing costs, and creating favorable conditions for the orderly promotion of the market-based interest rate reform. The PBC attaches great importance to strengthening deposit management. In accordance with the Regulations on the Administration of Savings, the Administrative Measures for RMB Corporate Deposits, and other relevant provisions, the PBC issued the Notice of the PBC on Strengtheningthe Administration of Deposit Interest Rates (Yinfa No.59 [2020]), requiring financial institutions to strictly implement the provisions on setting deposit interest rates as well as calculating and settling interest. Moreover, the PBC guides the Self-discipline Mechanism for Market Interest Rate Pricing (referred to as the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism) to implement self-discipline management of deposit interest rates so as to maintain orderly competition in the deposit market. First, urging the rectification of non-compliant deposit innovations. Prior to 2019, in order to absorb deposits, some financial institutions issued so-called “innovative” products, such as demand deposit products with interest calculated upon withdrawal with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, time deposit products withdrawn in advance with interest calculated with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, and time deposit products with periodic interest payments. These products, whose actual interest rates are obviously higher than the deposit rates with the same maturities, violate the regulations that time deposits withdrawn in advance are deemed to be current deposits when calculating the interest, and the principal and interest of lump-sum time deposits are due to be repaid in lump sums at maturity. In order to maintain orderly competition in the deposit market, since 2019 the PBC has guided the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism to reinforce self-discipline management of the deposit market, and it has urged financial institutions to operate in accordance with the laws and regulations and to rectify non-compliant deposit innovations in an orderly manner. In terms of demand deposit products with interest calculated with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, the outstanding balance before the rectification (as of May 16, 2019) stood at RMB6.7 trillion. Financial institutions were required to make rectifications gradually from May 17, 2019 and halted new businesses from December 1, 2019, with the balance maturing naturally. As of end-2020, the outstanding balance of the products registered RMB1.2 trillion, a remarkable drop of RMB5.5 trillion, or over 81 percent, as compared with that before the rectification. As for time deposit products withdrawn in advance with interest calculated with reference to the interest rate of time deposits with corresponding maturity, the outstanding balance posted RMB15.4 trillion before the rectification (as of December 16, 2019). Financial institutions were required to stop new businesses immediately from December 17, 2019, and to bring the balance to zero by the end of 2020. In order to implement the rectification requirements, some banks announced in December 2020 that the interest calculation rules of these time deposit products withdrawn in advance would be adjusted from January 1, 2021 and they made it clear that interest on time deposit products withdrawn in advance would be calculated with reference to the interest rate of demand deposits. As of end-2020, the balance of these time deposit products had been reduced to zero, a total drop of RMB15.4 trillion. Second, bringing the guaranteed yield of structural deposits under self-discipline management. The yield of structural deposits generally consists of a guaranteed yield and the yield linked to derivatives, the former of which is the same as the interest rateof common deposits. However, in order to attract customers, some financial institutions set a relatively high guaranteed yield for structural deposits, which, to some extent, disturbed competitive order in the deposit market. With the aim of promoting the regulated and orderly development of structural deposits, in December 2019, the PBC guided the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism to incorporate the guaranteed yield of structural deposits into the self-discipline management, and urged banks to set the interest rates at a reasonable level. Moreover, the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) also took measures to foster the orderly development of the structural deposit business by banks. In December 2020, the guaranteed yield of structural deposits stood at 1.25 percent, 1.18 percentage points lower as compared with that in December 2019. In the meanwhile, the overall expected yield and redemption yield of structural deposits witnessed a rapid decline of 0.5 percentage points and 0.54 percentage points from December 2019 to reach 3.09 percent and 3.03 percent in December 2020, respectively. At end-2020, the outstanding balance of structural deposits amounted to RMB6.3 trillion, RMB4.4 trillion less than the peak of RMB10.7 trillion in April 2020. Third, strengthening the management of non-local deposits. Non-local deposits refer to deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks through accounts opened in regions or cities where they have not set up physical outlets, including deposits taken via third-party Internet platforms or through their own online banking and mobile banking platforms or other channels. In the past two years, some locally incorporated banks witnessed rapid expansion by absorbing non-local deposits, which deviated from their positioning of serving local communities. As non-local deposits lack stability, the accumulated liquidity risks are prone to rapid spreading, jeopardizing the competitive order in the market and the stability of the financial system. In order to guide locally incorporated banks to better serve the local communities and to maintain competitive order in the market, the PBC will, starting from Q1 2021, incorporate non-local deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks into the macro-prudential assessment (MPA), and forbid locally incorporated banks from absorbing non-local deposits through various channels, with the outstanding balance settled when coming due. The provision does not apply to banks operating wholly online without physical outlets. As their business is free of geographical constraints, they are essentially nationwide banks. Therefore, they are regulated by the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism with reference to state-owned banks. As the cornerstone of the interest-rate system, the deposit benchmark interest rate will remain in place for a long time. Going forward, the PBC will continue to bring the role of the Interest Rate Self-discipline Mechanism into play, strengthen the management of non-compliant deposit innovations, structural deposits, and non-local deposits, prevent irrational competition, safeguard orderly competition in the deposit market, and maintain a stable cost for banks in assuming debts so as to create a favorable environment for promoting the market-based interest rate reform and fostering the steady decline of the comprehensive funding costs of enterprises.III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at a reasonable rate At end-2020, outstanding M2 recorded RMB218.7 trillion, up 10.1 percent year on year, an acceleration of 1.4 percentage points from the end of 2019. Outstanding M1 registered RMB62.6 trillion, a year-on-year growth of 8.6 percent and 4.2 percentage points higher than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding M0 reached RMB8.4 trillion, up 9.2 percent year on year and an increase of 3.8 percentage points from the end of 2019. The year 2020 witnessed a net cash injection into the economy of RMB712.5 billion, a rise of RMB314.4 billion year on year. According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) reached RMB284.83 trillion at end-2020, up 13.3 percent year on year and an acceleration of 2.6 percentage points over the end of the previous year. In 2020, the incremental AFRE reached RMB34.86 trillion on a cumulative basis, an increase of RMB9.19 trillion year on year. The following features characterized the growth of the AFRE. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-year increase. Second, the drop in entrusted loans narrowed and the growth in undiscounted bankers’ acceptances expanded. Third, both corporate bonds and equity financing increased considerably compared with the previous year. Fourth, government bond financing recorded a significantly larger year-on-year increase. Fifth, the increase in asset-backed securities of depository financial institutions narrowed from the previous year, while the growth of written-off loans accelerated.IV. The RMB exchange rate fluctuated, and cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow In 2020, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations being generally stable. Basedon market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In the first five months, both China and other economies were hindered by the COVID-19 pandemic and the international foreign exchange market experienced greater fluctuations. Consequently, the RMB exchange rate depreciated against the USD and appreciated slightly against the basket of currencies. After June, China took the lead in containing the pandemic, and economic fundamentals continued to improve. As a result, the RMB exchange rate appreciated against both the USD and the basket of currencies. The year 2020 witnessed increased RMB exchange rate elasticity that served an effective role in regulating the macro-economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. At end-2020, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 94.84 and 94.23, respectively, up 3.78 percent and 2.64 percent from end-2019. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), at end-2020, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 4.05 percent and 3.33 percent from end-2019, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism commenced to end-2020, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated by 37.67 percent and 51.32 percent, respectively. At end-2020, the central parity of the RMB against the USD was 6.5249, up 6.92 percent from end-2019, appreciating by 26.84 percent on a cumulative basis from the launch of the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism in 2005. In 2020, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rate against the USD was 4.5 percent. In 2020, cross-border RMB settlements totaled RMB28.4 trillion, up 44 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB14.1 trillion and RMB14.3 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 13 percent year on year to RMB6.8 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB4.8 trillion whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and other items registered RMB2 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account posted RMB21.6 trillion, up 59 percent year on year.Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In 2020, in the face of COVID-19, a pandemic unseen in a century, the PBC has upheld the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, adhered to the fundamental method of scientific decision-making and innovative response, and adopted a sound monetary policy in a flexible, appropriate, and targeted manner. The PBC coordinated pandemic containment with economic and social development, and went all out to ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and expectations, and to maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments, so as to create a favorable monetary and financial environment for securing a decisive victory in building a moderately prosperous society in all respects.I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Maintaining adequate liquidity at a reasonable level in the banking system. In 2020, the PBC closely monitored the liquidity supply and demand in the banking system and conducted open market operations in a more preemptive, precise, and timely manner. Besides long-term liquidity injections made through the use of instruments such as the cut in the required reserve ratio (RRR), central bank lending, central bank discounts, and the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), the PBC flexibly conducted open market operations, which were centered on the 7-day reverse repos, so as to maintain adequate liquidity at a reasonable level and to always strike a balance between liquidity supply and demand. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened market communications, improved the transparency of monetary policy, and effectively stabilized market expectations through various means, such as posting in advance the operation plan in the Announcement of Open Market Operations. In Q4, amid multiple seasonal and market factors affecting liquidity supply and demand, the PBC appropriately managed the intensity and pace of open market operations and responded to short-term truculence in a targeted manner. In late December, the PBC injected cross-year funds through 14-day reverse repo operations to meet market demand and maintain the stability of market liquidity at year-end. Guiding market rates to move around the central bank policy rates. In 2020, in response to the impact of COVID-19, the PBC preemptively guided the downward movement of policy rates, with both the MLF rate and the reverse repo rate falling by 30 bps, and cut the funding costs for private enterprises and micro and small-sized businesses (MSBs) through the transmission of the loan prime rate (LPR). In the second half of the year, both the MLF rate and the reverse repo rate remained unchanged, demonstrating a sound monetary policy stance. In the meanwhile, the PBC improved the continuity of open market operations, steadily sent short-term policy rate signals through daily operations, and guided short-term money market rates to move around the 7-day reverse repo operation rate on the open market within a reasonable range. The MLF rate, as the medium-term policy rate, has obvious guiding effects on medium and long-term market rates. In December, both interest rates on interbank CDs and yields on government bonds declined and converged toward the MLF rate. To judge the trend of short-term interest rates, we need to determine whether policy rates have changed in the first place, especially whether the 7-day reverse repo rate of the central bank’s open market operations has changed, and to avoid paying excessive attention to the number of open market operations. The number of open marketoperations is flexibly adjusted in accordance with temporary factors, such as public finance and cash as well as market demand. Its change does not fully reflect the trend in market rates, nor does the change represent a change in the central bank policy rate. Second, when observing market rates, we need to focus on the weighted average of DR007, which is the main indicator of market rates, and the average of DR007 over a period of time, rather than the transaction rate of an individual institution or the interest rate at a certain point of time, which may be disturbed by short-term factors.Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q4 2020, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent. In 2020, the PBC conducted CBS operations once in each month, totaling RMB61 billion. The CBS operations played a positive role in improving liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially small and medium-sized banks, and hence strengthened the capability of the financial sector to serve development of the real economy. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q4 2020, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totalingRMB35 billion. Specifically, the 1-year, 3-month, and 6-month bills registered RMB15 billion, RMB10 billion, and RMB10 billion, respectively. In 2020, the PBC issued in Hong Kong twelve batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills, totaling RMB155 billion. The regular issuance of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong not only enriched RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in the Hong Kong market but also drove both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market, thus promoting the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market. On January 27, 2021, Bank of China (Hong Kong) Limited launched a market-making mechanism for the RMB-denominated central bank bills repo business, fostering liquidity in the secondary market of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong. According to statistics, in 2020, offshore RMB bond issuances, other than the RMB-denominated central bank bills issued in Hong Kong, exceeded RMB130 billion, a year-on-year increase of 30 percent. Moreover, with the how and where to issue RMB bonds offshore increasingly diversified, the RMB offshore market saw more brisk transactions.II. Timely conducting Medium-term Lending Facility and Standing Lending Facility operations Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. An appropriate supply of medium- and long-term liquidity was ensured, giving full play to the signaling and guiding functions of the mid-term policy rate. In 2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB5.15 trillion of MLF operations, all with a maturity of one year. In particular, the amount of MLF operations posted RMB0.6 trillion, RMB0.4 trillion, RMB1.7 trillion, and RMB2.45 trillion in Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 respectively. At the end of the year, the outstanding MLF registered RMB5.15 trillion, RMB1.46 trillion more than that at the beginning of the year. The MLF operations were conducted by bidding, with the rate of February 17, 2020 posted 3.15 percent, down 10 basis points, and the rate of April 15, 2020 posted 2.95 percent, a further drop of 20 basis points. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner. The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was met in the full amount. In 2020, the PBC conducted a total of RMB186.2 billion SLF operations, of which RMB102.7 billion, RMB48.7 billion, RMB6 billion, and RMB28.8 billion SLF operations were conducted in Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 respectively. At the end of the year, the balance of SLF operations registered RMB19.8 billion. The SLF played a role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, thus promoting the smooth operation of the money market. The rates for SLF operations were reduced by 30 basis points in Q2. After the cut, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates were 3.05 percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent respectively. III. Enhancing monetary and credit support to offset the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic To coordinate regular pandemic containment and economic and social development, the intensity, pace and focus of monetary policy adjustments were properly managed based on the different features at each stage. Policy measures were implemented in a more targeted and direct manner, with the aim of ensuring stability on six fronts and maintaining security in six areas. The efforts to provide financial support to stabilize businesses and secure employment have achieved the expected results. Macro policies were enhanced in a timely manner to offset the impact of thepandemic. In 2020, RMB1.7 trillion of short-term liquidity was provided to the financial market when it reopened after the Spring Festival holiday, which effectively stabilized market expectations. The three rounds of RRR cuts in 2020 released RMB1.75 trillion of long-term funds. By means of RRR cuts, MLF operations, and open market operations, liquidity was kept adequate at a reasonable level, thereby safeguarding the stable movement of market rates and creating a favorable liquidity environment for the issue of special central government and local government bonds. The policies of RMB1.8 trillion of central bank lending and central bank discounts were rolled out and put into place, with a multi-level and multi-tier approach. In 2020, the PBC rolled out RMB300 billion of special central bank lending, RMB500 billion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts, and RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts in three rounds, with a total amount of RMB1.8 trillion, in support of pandemic containment, the resumption of work and production, as well as the development of the real economy, including micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). By end-June 2020, the RMB300 billion quota of special central bank lending was used up, supporting relevant banks to issue a cumulative RMB283.4 billion of preferential loans to a total of 7,597 nationwide and local key enterprises, with a weighted average interest rate of 2.49 percent. The actual financing costs for enterprises dropped to 1.25 percent after a 50-percent fiscal subsidy on the loan interest. The special central bank lending policy vigorously eased the shortage of medical supplies at the beginning of the outbreak and fostered the normal supply of daily necessities in key areas during the pandemic. The RMB500 billion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts was used up, supporting locally incorporated banks to issue a cumulative RMB498.3 billion of preferential loans to around 590,000 enterprises, with a weighted average interest rate of 4.22 percent, which effectively addressed the pressing problems of debt repayment, turnover of capital, and expansion of financing in face of the resumption of work and production. In December 2020, the RMB1 trillion quota of inclusive central bank lending and central bank discounts was allocated, supporting locally incorporated banks to support around 1,580,000 enterprises, with a weighted average interest rate of 4.67 percent. These policies boosted a sense of gain in the real sector, accelerated the resumption of work and production, and improved the job market. With highlighted characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy were proactively promoted, with the aim of bolstering the development of MSMEs. By end 2020, the principal and interest repayments on loans of RMB7.3 trillion had beendeferred by banking financial institutions across the country. The instrument in support of deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans operated on a monthly basis, providing a cumulative RMB8.7 billion of incentive funds to locally incorporated banks and supporting deferral of the principal on a total of RMB873.7 billion inclusive MSB loans from June to December. The weighted average time extension registered 12.8 months, easing the temporary pressures on MSBs to repay the loan principal and interest. In 2020, a total of RMB3.9 trillion of inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs were provided by banking financial institutions, RMB1.6 trillion more than that in 2019. The support scheme for inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs operated on a quarterly basis, providing a cumulative RMB170 billion of preferential funding to locally incorporated banks and supporting a total of RMB480.8 billion in unsecured loans for MSBs from March to December, effectively alleviating the financing strains on MSBs. In line with the arrangements decided by the executive meeting of the State Council on extending the policies of deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans and the support scheme of inclusive unsecured loans for MSBs, on December 31, 2020, the PBC, jointly with the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC), Ministry of Finance (MOF), the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), issued the Notice on Extending the Policies of Deferred Repayments of Principal and Interest on Inclusive Loans for Micro and Small Businesses and the Support Scheme of Inclusive Unsecured Loans for Micro and Small Businesses (Yinfa No.324 [2020]), extending the two policies until March 31, 2021. First, the policy of deferred repayments of principal and interest on inclusive loans to MSBs was extended. Repayment of all the inclusive MSB loans eligible for this policy could be deferred based on market principles, and banks and enterprises could discuss the relevant terms. For inclusive MSB loans with a deferred repayment period of no less than 6 months that are issued by locally incorporated financial institutions, the PBC provides incentive funding of 1 percent of the loan principal. Second, the support scheme of inclusive unsecured MSB loans was extended. For inclusive unsecured MSB loans that are newly issued by eligible locally incorporated financial institutions, the PBC provides favorable funding for 40 percent of the loan principal. IV. Lowering the Required Reserve Ratio for financial institutions In 2020, the PBC launched three rounds of RRR cuts for financial institutions and lowered the interest rate on excess reserves in an attempt to support the economicrecovery. In January 2020, the PBC reduced the RRR for financial institutions (excluding finance companies, financial leasing companies, and auto finance companies) by 0.5 percentage points releasing over RMB800 billion of long-term funds. In March, the PBC implemented a targeted RRR cut for inclusive finance. For banks that met the criteria for loan issuances for inclusive finance in 2019, the PBC granted a preferential RRR cut of 0.5 or 1.5 percentage points. Moreover, joint-stock commercial banks that received a 0.5-percentage-point RRR cut according to this assessment would enjoy an additional RRR cut of 1 percentage point. These two measures released about RMB550 billion of long-term funds in total, and guided financial institutions to expand loan issuances for inclusive finance. In April, the PBC announced a RRR cut of 1 percentage point for rural commercial banks, rural cooperative banks, rural credit cooperatives, village banks, and city commercial banks operating solely within their provincial-level administrative regions. The measure was implemented in two phases, under which cuts were carried out on April 15 and May 15 respectively. About RMB400 billion of long-term funds were freed up by the cuts. Meanwhile, the interest rate on excess reserves deposited in the central bank by financial institutions was lowered from 0.72 percent to 0.35 percent. All the above-mentioned measures contributed to broadening long-term and stable funding sources for financial institutions, improving their efficiency in the use of funds, and boosting their credit support for MSMEs as well as for industries and firms that were seriously hit by the pandemic. V. Further improving the macro-prudential policy framework The mechanism of a countercyclical capital buffer was established. In September 2020, the PBC and CBIRC jointly issued the Notice on Establishing the Mechanism of Countercyclical Capital Buffer (Yinfa No. 233 [2020]), stipulating the establishment of the mechanism of countercyclical capital buffer and setting the initial countercyclical capital buffer ratio at zero. The mechanism will contribute to the sound business operation of banking institutions and safeguard the stability of China’s financial system. A regulatory framework for financial holding companies (FHCs) was preliminarily set up. In September 2020, the PBC released the Trial Measures on the Regulation of Financial Holding Companies (Order No. 4 [2020] of the People’s Bank of China), which entered into effect from November 2020. The Measures specify law-based market access for FHCs that are invested in and controlled by non-financial companies. The capital, behavior, and risk of FHCs shall beregulated in an all-round, continuous, and look-through manner, so as to effectively isolate the FHCs’ real economic activities from their financial activities and to prevent cross-organization, cross-industry, or cross-market risk contagion. The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was improved. On December 3, 2020, the PBC and the CBIRC jointly released the Measures for Assessment of Systemically Important Banks (SIBs) (Yinfa No. 289 [2020]). The Measures specify the indicators, procedures, and work division in the assessment of SIBs in China, and they establish the basis for SIB identification. A management system for real estate loan concentration for banking institutions was established. In December 2020, the PBC, jointly with CBIRC, issued the Notice on Establishing a Management System for Real Estate Loan Concentration for Banking Institutions (Yinfa No.322 [2020]), which set up a management system for real estate loan concentration and specified the ceiling proportions of real estate loans and personal housing loans in the total loans of banking institutions. The system will contribute to strengthening the resilience and soundness of the financial system, promoting steady and healthy development of the real estate market, enhancing the banking institutions’ internal constraints, improving the credit structure, and fostering balanced development of the financial sector, the real estate sector, and the real economy. The role of the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. Since the beginning of 2020, in line with the requirements for key tasks set at the Central Economic Work Conference, the PBC further improved the MPA, optimized the credit structure, and reduced financing costs. First, the weight of financing to MSBs and private enterprises as well as the manufacturing sector was increased in bank assessments, and “use of central bank lending” was introduced as a temporary assessment indicator. These measures guided financial institutions to enhance their support for the key areas and weak links in the national economy and secured incremental financing flows to the manufacturing sector and MSMEs. Second, the PBC improved the assessment of the use of the LPR, released the potential of LPR reform in reducing loan interest rates, encouraged banks to accelerate the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans, and pushed ahead with a marked decline in the overall financing costs for enterprises.The macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing was adjusted. On March 11, 2020, the PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) released the Notice on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Parameter for Cross-border Financing (Yinfa No. 64 [2020]), increasing the parameter from 1 to 1.25. In order to improve the macro-prudential management of overall cross-border financing and to guide financial institutions to adjust their asset and liability structure of foreign exchange in a market-based manner, the PBC and the SAFE decided to lower the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for financial institutions’ cross-border financing to 1 from 1.25 on December 11, 2020. In addition, the PBC and the SAFE released the Notice on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Parameter for Cross-border Financing (Yinfa No. 5 [2021]), lowering the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing of enterprises to 1 from 1.25 on January 7, 2021. The foreign exchange risk reserve ratio was adjusted when appropriate. Since the beginning of 2020, the RMB exchange rate experienced two-way floating based on market supply and demand amid strengthened flexibility, stable market expectations, orderly cross-border capital flows, stable performance in the foreign exchange market, and balanced market demand and supply. As a result, the PBC decided to reduce the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from 20 percent to zero, effective from October 12, 2020. VI. Actively leveraging the role of structural monetary policy instruments The PBC actively used central bank lending to support rural development, central bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other tools to guide financial institutions to step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural people as well as poverty alleviation. Good use was made of central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects to increase credit supply to the “three autonomous regions”, i.e., Tibet, the four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, the areas in four provinces with large Tibetan populations, and the “three autonomous prefectures”, i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, to lower the financing costs in these areas as well as to achieve targeted poverty alleviation. In the four quarters of 2020, central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects was issued in the amounts of RMB6.3 billion, RMB8.0 billion, RMB7.2 billion, and RMB7.9 billion, respectively, with the balance recording RMB37.0 billion at end-2020. At end-2020, outstanding centralbank lending to support rural development registered RMB457.2 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB975.6 billion and RMB215.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB578.4 billion. In 2020, the PBC made a net withdrawal of PSLs in the amount of RMB302.3 billion from policy and development banks, with the net withdrawal in Q4 totaling RMB199.3 billion and the outstanding PSL registering RMB3.2350 trillion at end-2020. Targeted Medium-term Lending Facility (TMLF) operations were conducted. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions to expand their credit supply to MSBs and private firms with preferential interest rates. In the first quarter of 2020, the PBC conducted one-year TMLF operations totaling RMB240.5 billion, with a rate of 3.15 percent. In the second quarter, the PBC conducted one-year TMLF operations totaling RMB56.1 billion, with a rate of 2.95 percent. The TMLFs maturing in Q3 were rolled over in the form of MLFs. In the fourth quarter, the PBC did not conduct any TMLF operations. At end-2020, the outstanding TMLFs totaled RMB296.6 billion. Box 2 Boosting Green Finance to Reach a Carbon Emissions Peak and Achieve Carbon Neutrality In 2020, General Secretary Xi Jinping announced at the General Debate of the 75th Session of the United Nations General Assembly that China would strive to reach a carbon emissions peak by 2030 and to achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. It was required at the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference that efforts should be made to accelerate green and low-carbon development and to make good progress in reaching a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality. Centering around the objectives of peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality, the PBC will deliver a sound overarching design and plan for green finance, give play to the three functions of finance to support green development, and gradually improve the five pillars of the green finance system. I. Bringing into play the three major functions of finance to support green development Green finance refers to economic activities aimed at supporting improvements in the environment, mitigating climate change, and high-efficiency utilization of resources. It means providing financial services for the funding and investment, project operation, and risk management of programs concerning environmental protection,energy conservation, clean energy, green transport, and green building. Centering around the goals of a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality, work should be done to further focus on carbon emissions reductions, to give full play to the role of resource allocations, and to manage well the risks related to climate change in the process of developing green finance. In addition, efforts should be made to promote carbon price discovery under the constraints of carbon neutrality and to guide the financial system to allocate more resources to green and low-carbon areas. First, full play should be given to resource allocations. Currently, fossil fuels account for a large share of the total energy consumption in China. With the aim of achieving a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality, the proportion of fossil fuel against total energy consumption needs to gradually decline. Therefore, great efforts must be made to promote the development of renewable resources, such as wind and solar power, and to conserve energy and reduce carbon emissions in the areas of electricity, industry, architecture, and transportation. Meanwhile, development of technologies such as carbon capture and storage should be further supported. In order to promote the development of green finance to focus on green and low-carbon areas, a variety of policy measures, such as monetary policies, credit policies, regulatory policies, compulsory disclosures, green evaluations, self-regulation, and product innovations should be adopted so as to guide and allocate more financial resources to green innovation projects in terms of clean energy, green transformation, and carbon capture and storage. Second, there should be proper management of risks related to climate change. In the future, constraints on carbon emissions will be strengthened notably, incurring risks to the transformation of the high-carbon industries. The frequent occurrence of natural disasters caused by climate change will also have an impact on various fields. Various means such as pressure tests on climate risks and environmental and climate risk analyses should be adopted to enhance the financial system’s capability to manage the risks related to transformation and climate change. Third, carbon price discovery will be promoted under the constraint of carbon neutrality. Centering around the objective of carbon neutrality, it is necessary to set carbon emissions quotas with strong binding force. Construction of a national carbon emissions trading market will be promoted, along with related financial product and trading mechanism designs so as to promote market discovery of a reasonable carbon price under the carbon emissions constraints. II. Gradually improving the five major pillars of a green finance system To give play to the three major functions of finance in support of green development, the five major pillars of a green finance system should be gradually improved. First, continue building a standard system for green finance. China is already taking the lead in terms of setting the standards for green finance, but these standards have yet to be gradually unified domestically as well as to be compatible with international practices. We can start with trials of national standards and industrial standards for green finance so as to promote regulated development of green finance and to accumulate valuable experience for promoting nationwide green finance standards that is feasible for banks and beneficial to enterprises. Second, improve supervision of financial institutions and the requirements for information disclosure. Gradually establish a system of climate and environmental information disclosures for financial institutions and guide more investment toward environment friendly enterprises, such as those that are green and low-carbon. Third, establish a policy incentive and constraint mechanism. Performance evaluations of green finance should be periodically conducted for financial institutions. The feasibility of setting differentiated risk weights for green and brown assets should be studied. The PBC will comprehensively adopt a variety of monetary policy tools to guide financial institutions to step up credit support to the green and low-carbon sectors. Fourth, continuously improve green financial products and the relevant market system. As of end-Q3 2020, outstanding green loans denominated in RMB and foreign currencies in China posted over RMB11 trillion, ranking first in the world. Full play will be given to the market mechanism. By means of innovating products and tools, enhancing pricing rationality, and strengthening environmental risk management, the PBC will continue to encourage products including green credit, green bonds, and green funds, build a carbon trading market, and develop carbon futures. Fifth, strengthen international cooperation on green finance. Continue to deepen international cooperation in green finance under multilateral frameworks, such as the G20, the Central Banks, and the Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), and the “Belt and Road”, as well as under bilateral frameworksbetween China and Europe, China and the United Kingdom, China and France, etc. Going forward, the PBC will follow the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, focus on the three major functions and five pillars of green financial development, and improve the policy framework and the incentive and constraint mechanisms for green finance. It will utilize structural monetary policy instruments and guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development in accordance with market-oriented principles so as to achieve the objectives of peak carbon and carbon neutrality. VII. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reform Oriented by high-quality development, the PBC guided financial institutions to continuously step up support to key areas and weak links in the national economy, enhanced financial support for market entities impacted by COVID-19, and focused on keeping businesses and employment stable. It also provided powerful support to achieve the goal of winning the battle against poverty and to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects. Emphasis was placed on providing financial support to keep businesses and employment stable. Financial services were continuously improved, promoting MSB financing featuring “increased volume, lowered price and expanding coverage”. The PBC enhanced support for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector to promote its high-quality development. The PBC implemented the policy of deferred repayments for inclusive loans to MSBs, and provided support for unsecured inclusive loans to MSBs, and work was done to ensure the continuation and reasonable adjustment of policy so as to invigorate market entities and stabilize market expectations. By focusing on key groups and key businesses, the PBC conducted a variety of innovative activities connecting government agencies, banks, and businesses to enable more effective and better-matched financing. No efforts were spared in providing targeted financial support for completing the task of poverty alleviation. The PBC focused on the deeply impoverished regions and the counties listed for supervision of poverty relief. Financial support was enhanced for industrial development used as a means of poverty alleviation and for relocation of impoverished residents. The quality of basic financial services in thepoverty-stricken areas was improved, with all the impoverished counties lifted out of poverty. In addition, the PBC promoted the improvement of corresponding regulatory mechanisms for financing poverty alleviation, concentrated on preventing and resolving relevant risks, and cooperated with the census on poverty elimination, thereby facilitating high-quality and sustainable poverty alleviation. More resources were allocated to support the rural revitalization strategy. The PBC arranged special quotas of central bank lending to support rural development and supported bank issuance of more loans to expand pig farming. Financial services were improved for spring plough and farming preparations, and for agricultural investment. Work was done to optimize financial services for reform of the rural property rights system, to develop the collective economy, and to promote the collateralization of operational rights of contracted farmland. VIII. Further deepening the market-based interest rate reform Since the beginning of 2020, the PBC has smoothed the transmission of monetary policy by means of reforms. With continued progress in the LPR reform, the financing costs of enterprises have witnessed an obvious decline. First, taking a forward-looking view, the PBC guided the open market operation (OMO) rates and the MLF rates to move downward by 30 basis points, driving down the one-year LPR by 30 basis points. Accordingly, the overall market rates and loan rates went downward, supporting the reasonable growth of loan demand. In December, the weighted average rate on corporate loans posted 4.61 percent, down by 0.51 percentage points from the previous December and hitting a record low for two consecutive months. Second, use of the LPR was further promoted. Starting from January 1, 2020, newly-issued loans no longer took the benchmark loan rates as their pricing reference. During the period from March to August 2020, the shift in the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans was completed in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. As of end-August, 92.4 percent of outstanding loans had completed the shift in the pricing benchmark. Banks were urged to incorporate the LPR into the funds transfer pricing (FTP) of loans, fundamentally removing the implicit floor of loan rates. Accordingly, more financial resources were guided to be allocated to MSBs and private enterprises, and the actual loan rates declined. Third, the market-oriented reform of credit-card overdraft interest rates was promoted. The credit-card overdraft interest rates were determined by negotiations between credit-card issuers and cardholders from January 1, 2020, with the caps and floors removed. Administrative controls on credit-card overdraft interestrates were lifted and market-oriented pricing was completely achieved, which was conducive to promoting market competition and urging card issuers to improve services. Fourth, the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rates was strengthened, promoting explicit indications of annualized loan rates. Special membership was set up and micro-credit companies were included into the scope of interest rate self-regulation so as to improve the self-regulatory mechanism for market-rate pricing. Fifth, the benchmark deposit interest rates continued to play their role as the “ballast” for the overall interest rate system in China. Efforts were made to strengthen the self-regulation of deposit interest rates, to reduce irregular innovative deposit products, and to maintain competitive order in the deposit market. The LPR reform promoted optimization of the financial structure, smoothed the internal pricing mechanism of banks, and effectively promoted the market-based reform of deposit rates, as indicated by the overall decline of deposit rates. IX. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate regime and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of the exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In 2020, the highest and lowest CNY central parities were 6.5236 and 7.1316, respectively, against the USD. During the 243 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 140 days and depreciated on 103 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 1.00 percent (670 bps) and 0.76 percent (530 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rates against other major international currencies floated in two ways. At end-2020, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the pound. and the Japanese yen had appreciated 6.92 percent, 2.92 percent, and 1.34 percent, respectively, from end-2019, while the RMB central parity had depreciated 2.61 percent against the euro during the same period of time. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism commenced in 2005, the RMB had appreciated by a cumulative total of 26.84 percent, 24.79 percent, and 15.53 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen through end-December, 2020. Direct RMB trading was buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stableliquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and to facilitate bilateral trade and investment.As of end-December, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB50.032 billion, and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD516 million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.X. Promoting the resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner and deepening the reform of financial institutions Resolution of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions was carried out smoothly. The PBC strove to ease the impact of the pandemic and achieved crucial progress and important initial results in the resolution of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions. The reform and restructuring plans of key financial institutions, including Hengfeng Bank and Jinzhou Bank, were carried out smoothly to ensure the sound operation of the financial system during the critical and sensitive period and to firmly safeguard the bottom line that no systemic risks should occur. Risk resolution of Baoshang Bank (BSB) was advanced steadily and orderly. The reform and restructuring of BSB has been progressing smoothly, and Mengshang Bank and Huishang Bank, which have entered into the purchase and assumption process with BSB, are abundant in capital and operating smoothly. As BSB has become seriously insolvent and has failed to repay debts that came due, the takeover group filed a bankruptcy petition with the CBIRC in the name of the troubled bank and the regulator has approved the bank’s application to enter into bankruptcy procedures. On November 23, 2020, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court ruled to accept the bankruptcy and liquidation petition of BSB, and it appointed the BSB liquidation group as the administrator. Up to now, the work on BSB bankruptcy and liquidation has been progressing steadily and orderly. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC advanced the reform plans for development and policy financial institutions across the board to redefine their responsibilities and the scope of their business, improve corporate governance, strengthen the constraint and incentive mechanism, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development, thus better serving the national development strategies. XI. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Two-way opening-up of the financial market was pushed forward. First, the pilot quota of Qualified Domestic Limited Partner (QDLP) and Qualified Domestic Investment Enterprise (QDIE) was increased to USD10 billion in Shanghai, Beijing.and Shenzhen. Second, Hainan Free Trade Port and the city of Chongqing were added to the QDLP pilot program, with a quota of USD5 billion in each area. Facilitation of receipts and payments for trade was boosted. First, the pilot program for facilitating foreign exchange receipts and payments for trade was expanded to cover more areas in a steady and orderly manner. Second, outbound foreign exchange payments under trade in services became more convenient. On November 1, 2020, online verification services for tax registration of foreign exchange payments under trade in services were launched for trial operation nationwide. Third, to facilitate individuals’ foreign exchange business under the initiative of “going global”. The pilot program was expanded for online processing of foreign exchange sales and purchases for overseas studies which are not part of the annual quota for foreign exchange purchases by individuals. Fourth, to improve the environment for foreign exchange business after “bringing in”. The pilot programs for facilitating small-value consumption by foreign individuals and for facilitating foreign exchange purchases and payments for the income of foreign top-level talents in China were promoted. Administration of the foreign exchange market was strengthened. With regular pandemic containment measures remaining in place, efforts were made to coordinate pandemic containment with financial risk prevention and mitigation. Monitoring and analysis of potential risks incurred in cross-border fund flows were strengthened. Emphasis was placed on cracking down on illegal financial activities, such as underground banks, cross-border gambling, and illegal online foreign exchange trading so as to ensure stability on six fronts and to maintain security in six areas. In 2020, a total of 2,440 cases violating the laws and regulations of the foreign exchange administration were handled, with total fines amounting to RMB940 million. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In 2020, the financial market operated smoothly. Market interest rates were basically stable. The volume of bond issuances and cash bond transactions expanded. The stock market index picked up and witnessed year-on-year rises in both turnover and the size of funds raised.I. Financial market overview 1. Money market transactions were active with stable interest rates Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level, and money market interest rates were stable. In December 2020, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending and pledged repos posted 1.3 percent and 1.36 percent, respectively, down 79 basis points and 74 basis points, respectively, from December 2019. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond repos among depository institutions posted 1.14 percent, 22 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. At end-2020, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 1.09 percent and 2.38 percent, respectively, down 60 and 36 basis points from end-2019, respectively. The market saw active repo transactions and interbank lending. In 2020, the volume of trading of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB959.8 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.9 trillion and a year-on-year increase of 17.6 percent. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB147.1 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB590.9 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 2.6 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos and overnight lending accounted for 84.7 percent and 90.2 percent, respectively, of the total turnover in bond repos and interbank lending, decreasing 0.5 percentage points and 1.2 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 20.3 percent year on year to RMB287.3 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses operated steadily. In 2020, around 29,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB19.0 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB167.3 trillion. At end-2020, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB11.2 trillion. Around 52,000 negotiable CDs was issued by financial institutions in 2020, raising RMB9.7 trillion, a decrease of RMB2.3 trillion year on year. In 2020, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.60 percent, 20 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. Interest rate swap transactions witnessed steady growth. In 2020, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 274,000 transactions, increasing 15.3 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB19.6 trillion, an increase of 7.8 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB12. 5 trillion, accounting for 63.8 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 82.7 percent and 14.9 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In 2020, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 1,718 transactions, with RMB266.5 billion of the notional principal.The loan prime rate (LPR) interest rate option business developed steadily. After the LPR interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market on March 23, 2020, it has attracted participation by a variety of market players, covering large commercial banks, joint-stock commercial banks, city commercial banks, rural commercial banks, foreign-funded banks, securities companies, and so forth. At end-2020, a total of 484 interest rate option transactions were concluded, adding up to RMB90.75 billion. Specifically, 126 LPR interest rate swap transactions were concluded, amounting to RMB14.35 billion of the notional principal, and 358 were LPR interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB76.4 billion of the notional principal. 2. Bond financing costs decreased on the whole, and transactions and issuances of cash bonds expanded Bond market yields went down first and then picked up, with credit spreads widening. Government securities yields decreased continuously from January to April 2020, and have rebounded since then. At end-2020, the yields on 1-year and 10-year government securities increased by 11 basis points and 1 basis point, respectively, from end-2019. Credit spreads on 3-year AAA and AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills expanded by 3 basis points and 52 basis points year on year, respectively.The costs of financing through the issuance of bonds decreased. In 2020, the average coupon rate of 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.93 percent, 24 basis points lower than the rate in 2019. The average coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by China Development Bank was 3.31 percent, 26 basis points lower than the rate in 2019. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated non-financial enterprises was 2.82 percent, 58 basis points lower than the rate in 2019. The volume of cash bond transactions on the interbank market maintained growth and that on the stock exchanges witnessed a significant increase. In 2020, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB253 trillion, registering an increase of 16.5 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of bond trading on the interbank market was RMB232.8 trillion, representing an increase of 11.5 percent year on year. The value of bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB20.2 trillion, an increase of 141.6 percent year on year. The value of bond lending transactions stood at RMB7.5 trillion, an increase of 61.6 percent year on year. Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In 2020, the value of bond issuances increased by 26 percent, or RMB11.7 trillion, year on year to RMB56.9 trillion, with government bonds, financial bonds, and corporate debenture bonds increasing by RMB5 trillion, RMB3.2 trillion, and RMB3.5 trillion, respectively. At end-2020, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB116.7 trillion, an increase of 17.9 percent year on year.3. Bill financing grew continuously The bill acceptance business grew continuously. In 2020, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB22.1 trillion, rising 8.4 percent year on year. At end-2020, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.1 trillion, increasing 10.7 percent year on year. In 2020, outstanding commercial draft acceptances rose by RMB1.4 trillion,and 70.3 percent of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing expanded continuously. In 2020, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB40.4 trillion, growing 17.7 percent year on year. At end-2020, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.4 trillion, up 9.7 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.8 percent of the total outstanding loans, 0.1 percentage points lower year on year. 4. Stock indices soared, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing significantly year on year Stock indices soared. At end-2020, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,473 points, increasing 13.9 percent from end-2019. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 14,471 points, increasing 38.7 percent from end-2019. Turnover on the stock markets expanded significantly. In 2020, the combined turnover of the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB206.8 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB851.1 billion, an increase of 63 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets surged year on year. In 2020, a cumulative RMB1.2 trillion was raised, increasing 68.6 percent year on year. 5. Growth of premium income slowed down, while growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In 2020, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB4.5 trillion, up 6.1 percent year on year, a deceleration of 6.1 percentage points from 2019. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB1.4 trillion, representing a year-on-year increase of 7.9 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claim and benefit payments increased 7 percent year on year, and total life insurance claim and benefit payments went up by 8.8 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-2020, total assets in the insurance sector increased 13.3 percent year on year to RMB23.3 trillion, an acceleration of 1.1 percentage points from end-2019. Specifically, bank deposits and investment-linked assets increased by 3 percent and 19.2 percent, respectively, year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions rose slightly year on year In 2020, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD8.4 trillion, an increase of 5.6 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD16.3 trillion, a decrease of 0.2 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD9.5 trillion, accounting for 57.9 percent of the total swap turnover. Turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD104.4 billion, rising 37.4 percent year on year. Turnover in foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD810.9 billion, rising 70.5 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 57.2 percent of the total market share. Participants on the foreign exchange market expanded continuously. At end-2020, there were 735 members on the foreign exchange spot market, 266 members on the foreign exchange forward market, 259 members on the foreign exchange swap market, 213 members on the currency swap market, and 163 members on the foreign exchange options market. There were 30 market makers on the spot market and 27 market makers on the forward and swap markets. 7. The gold market operated steadily with an overall rise in pricesGold prices experienced a choppy rise. At end-2020, Loco London closed at USD1,897.5 per ounce, representing a gain of 25.07 percent from end-2019. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB390.0 per gram, increasing 14.44 percent from end-2019. In 2020, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 58,700 tons, representing a decrease of 14.44 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB22.55 trillion, increasing 4.91 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond and bill market The legal system of the bond market was improved. In February 2020, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), Ministry of Finance (MOF), People’s Bank of China (PBC), and China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) jointly released an announcement allowing qualified pilot commercial banks and insurers with proper investment management capacity to participate in the trading of treasury bond futures at the China Financial Futures Exchange in line with the principles of law compliance, manageable risks, and sustainable business development. In June 2020, the PBC, together with the relevant departments, released the Notice of the PBC, NDRC, and CSRC on Issues Concerning Disposal of Defaults on Corporate Debenture Bonds (Yinfa No.144 [2020]), which improved the risk prevention and disposal mechanism of defaults on corporate debenture bonds. In the meantime, the PBC promoted release of the Minutes of the Symposium on Courts’ Hearings of Bond-Related Dispute Cases by the Supreme People’s Court so as to consolidate legal safeguards. In July 2020, the PBC and relevant departments jointly released the Rules for Recognition of Standard Debt-Based Assets (Announcement No.5 [2020] of the PBC, CBIRC, CSRC and SAFE), which specified the boundaries, identification criteria, and regulatory arrangements for standard debt-based assets and non-standard debt-based assets so as to guide well-regulated market development. In December 2020, the PBC released Announcement No.21 [2020] of the PBC, for the purpose of strengthening interim and ex-post management of market makers for spot bond trading in the interbank market following the cancellation of administrative approvals. In December 2020, the PBC, together with the relevant departments, released the Administrative Measures for Information Disclosures of Corporate Debenture Bonds (Announcement No.22 [2020] of the PBC, NDRC and CSRC), which unified the standards for information disclosures of corporate debenture bonds. In December 2020, the Standing Committee of the 13th National People’s Congress deliberated and approved Amendment (XI) to the Criminal Law, which greatly increased penalties for crimes such as fraudulent issuances, fabricated information disclosures, false certificates provided by intermediaries, and so on, in an attempt toprovide a solid legal safeguard for the high-quality development of the bond market. In June 2020, the PBC released the Administrative Measures on Standardized Bills (Announcement No.6 [2020] of the PBC). Standardized bills connect the bill market with the bond market and enable the professional pricing and investing capacity of the bond market to be fully leveraged in a way that improves the standardization of bill transactions and enhances the financing function of bills. In December, the PBC released Announcement No.19 [2020] of the PBC, which specifies, in terms of commercial acceptance drafts, the requirements for information indicated on the drafts and the disclosure of credit information of acceptors so as to improve market-based constraint mechanisms and safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of holders. 2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures industry Significant progress was secured in the capital market reform. On a national scale, the CSRC removed foreign ownership limits in futures companies from January 1, 2020 and those in securities companies and fund management companies from April 1, 2020. In July 2020, the first group of enterprises went public on the newly established National Equities Exchange and Quotations Select (NEEQ Select), achieving critical headway in building a multi-layer capital market. In August 2020, the reform of ChiNext market was officially launched with the pilot registration-based system in place, which was an important achievement in the reform of the registration-based IPO system. The legal system in the capital market was further improved. The new Securities Law was implemented as of March 1, 2020, which provided a solid legal guarantee for preventing and controlling market risks, safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of investors, and forging a well-regulated, transparent, open, vigorous, and resilient capital market. In July 2020, the Supreme People’s Court released the Provisions on Several Issues Concerning Representative Actions Arising from Securities Disputes, marking the official launch of China’s class action system in securities disputes. Capital market building was stepped up. In October 2020, the State Council released the Opinions on Further Improving the Quality of Listed Companies, for the purposes of improving the quality of listed companies in six respects, including advancedcorporate governance and strengthened corporate growth. In November 2020, the Central Committee for Deepening Overall Reform deliberated and approved the Implementation Plan for Improving the Delisting Mechanism of Listed Companies, aiming to improve the delisting mechanism and enhance the delisting intensity for listed companies through six means, including improving delisting standards and streamlining delisting procedures. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The development of commercial insurance in the social service sector was bolstered. In January 2020, the CBIRC, together with 12 other ministries and commissions, issued the Opinions on Promoting the Development of Commercial Insurance in the Field of Social Services, which introduced 11 policies and measures in five respects to help commercial insurance play a better role in the social service sector. The property insurance industry was propelled to shift toward high-quality development. In July 2020, the CBIRC released the Notice on Issuing the Three-Year Action Plan (2020–2022) for Promoting High-Quality Development of the Property Insurance Industry and put forward elaborate planning, including such aspects as the transformation and development of the industry, the capability to serve the national economy, society, and people’s livelihood, the level of opening-up and international influence as well as regulatory policies, systems, and mechanisms. The development of personal insurance was promoted, featuring wider coverage, improved quality, and steady growth. In December 2020, measures were rolled out at the executive meeting of the State Council to promote personal insurance development featuring wider coverage, improved quality, and steady growth. The measures include accelerating the development of commercial health insurance, incorporating commercial pension insurance into old-age pension services as the third pillar and speeding up its construction, and enhancing the long-term investment capacity of insurance funds. 4. Enhancing coordinated supervision of the financial infrastructure In March 2020, after being deliberated and passed at the tenth meeting of the Central Committee for Deepening Overall Reform, the Work Plan on Coordinating Supervision over the Financial Infrastructures (Yinfa No.54 [2020]) was co-issued by the PBC, NDRC, MOF, CBIRC, CSRC, and State Administration of ForeignExchange (SAFE). The work plan aimed to further improve the coordinated supervision and construction planning of the financial infrastructure in China and to enhance the capability of serving the real economy and forestalling financial risks. In July 2020, the PBC and CSRC jointly issued Announcement No. 7 [2020] of the PBC and CSRC and approved interconnectivity cooperation between relevant infrastructure institutions in the interbank bond market and the exchange-traded bond market. The PBC and CSRC will strengthen regulatory cooperation and coordination to boost the free flow of factors in the bond market. 5. Promoting the high-level opening-up of the financial market In March 2020, under the guidance of the PBC, relevant financial infrastructures improved their transaction settlement arrangements and launched services such as rolling settlement and flexible settlement intervals, which met the diversified needs of overseas institutional investors and further facilitated their operations. In September 2020, the PBC, CSRC and SAFE jointly drafted the Announcement on Issues Concerning Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Exposure Draft), which clarifies the overall institutional arrangements for the opening-up of China’s bond market and solicits market opinions on the arrangements facilitating overseas institutional investors to allocate RMB bond assets. In September 2020, FTSE Russell announced that it would add China government bonds to its World Government Bond Index (WGBI) in October 2021. So far, all of the three global major bond index providers have included or are planning to include China’s bonds in their relevant indexes, which fully reflects international investors’ confidence in the long-term sound development of China’s economy and further opening-up of China’s financial sector. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments In 2020, impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the global economy has experienced the most severe recession since World War II. The advanced economies have implemented ultra-loose monetary policies and large-scale fiscal stimulus plans, and the economies recovered in the second half of the year. Meanwhile, the pandemic has caused the rise of fiscal sustainability risks and financial risks that deeply influenced the global economic structure, international trade and investment, and may lead to a long-lasting scarring effect. 1. Economic and financial market performance in the major economies The global economy has experienced a slow recovery. In 2020, the major advanced economies went through a GDP drop in Q2, a GDP rise in Q3, and a recovery divergence in Q4. In Japan, the year-on-year GDP growth rate in Q3 was -5.7 percent, with the drop declining by 4.6 percent from Q2. The US posted a 2.5 percent year-on-year GDP decrease in Q4, with the drop declining by 6.6 and 0.4 percentage points from Q2 and Q3 respectively, while the annual year-on-year GDP decrease was 3.5 percent. The euro area posted a 5.1 percent year-on-year GDP decrease in Q4, with the drop declining by 9.6 percentage points from Q2 but expanding slightly by 0.8 percentage points from Q3, while the annual year-on-year GDP decrease was 6.8 percent. The global pandemic has worsened since December 2020, with nearly 20 million new confirmed COVID-19 global cases in a single month and over 100 million cumulative confirmed COVID-19 global cases. Numerous countries enhanced their pandemic control measures, and the economic recovery slowed down. The US Consumer Confidence Index dropped from its peak of 49.8 in November to 44.6 in December, while the services PMI in the euro area and the U.K. dropped below 50 since September and November, respectively. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) posted a decrease in their latest global growth forecasts for 2020 by 3.5, 4.3, and 4.2 percent, while bouncing back by 5.5, 4.0, and 4.2 percent for 2021, respectively, with the global economy basically not recovering to its pre-pandemic level until Q4 of 2021. The labor market has deteriorated. The US unemployment rate reached its peak of 14.8 percent in April 2020 and has gradually decreased ever since, while the drop continued to decline, with the December unemployment rate remaining unchanged at 6.7 percent from November. From April to November 2020, the euro area unemployment rate increased from 7.2 percent to 8.3 percent, while the U.K. unemployment rate increased from 4.0 percent to 5.0 percent. The deterioration of labor market conditions not only reflected the increase in the unemployment rate but also the decline in working hours. The International Labor Organization estimated that global working hours in Q3 2020 decreased by 12.1 percent from Q4 2019, which equals a loss of 345 million full-time jobs. Inflation generally went down, with a divergence across the economies. The major advanced economies have continued with a low level of inflation. In December 2020, the year-on-year growth rate of the CPI posted 1.4 and 0.6 percent for the US andU.K., respectively, while the year-on-year growth rate of the HICP in the euro area and the CPI for Japan posted -0.3 and -1.2 percent. Some of the emerging market economies experienced a deflation. Thailand and Malaysia continued to have a negative CPI growth rate since March 2020, with a year-on-year growth rate of -0.3 and -1.4 percent, respectively. Meanwhile, India, Brazil, and other economies have to some extent faced some structural inflationary pressures, with a 4.6 percent year-on-year growth rate of the CPI for India and a 4.5 year-on-year growth rate of the IPCA for Brazil in December. International trade and investment declined significantly. The WTO forecast that the volume of world merchandise trade would record a 9.2 percent year-on-year decline in 2020, followed by a potential 7.2 percent rebound in 2021, while the trade volume might still be significantly lower than the level in 2019. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) stated that global foreign direct investment experienced a 42 percent year-on-year decrease, and growth would continue to be weak in 2021.There were heightened potential risks in the financial markets. In March 2020, financial markets in the major advanced economies fell into a panic, reflected by a sell-off in risky assets and some traditional safe haven assets, and circuit-breakers in the stock markets of multiple countries amid a liquidity contraction of the US dollar, as well as currency depreciations and large capital outflows in the emerging economies. Since April, as the major economies adopted large-scale stimulus plans, market sentiment tended to calm down, and the financial markets were significantly restored. The liquidity of the US dollar converted from a shortage to abundance, with the USD index declining from 102 in March to 90 at the end of December. At the end of 2020, the one-year London interbank market USD-Libor was 0.34 percent, 166 bps lower than that at the end of last year, while the one-year euro-area interbank market Euribor was -0.50 percent, 25 bps lower than that at the end of last year. Against the background of a weak recovery of the real economy, global stock markets rebounded strongly, with a new high for the three major US stock market indexes in December 2020, which was detached from economic fundamentals with heightened potential risks. 2. Monetary policies of the major economies Implementing ultra-loose monetary policies. First, policy rates were swiftly lowered. In March 2020, over 40 central banks across the globe lowered their interest rates more than 50 times in total, while the US Fed, the Bank of England (BOE), and the Bank of Canada (BOC) set their policy rates close to zero. Second, the scale ofmonetary policy operations was expanded. The US Fed, the BOC, and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) increased the scale and duration of their repurchase agreements. The European Central Bank (ECB) increased the volume and decreased the price of its targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III). Third, asset purchase plans were resumed or enhanced. The US Fed and the BOJ committed unlimited treasury purchases, while the ECB expanded its asset purchase program (APP) and set up a new pandemic emergency purchase program (PEPP). The central banks in Australia, Canada, India, South Korea, and other countries also launched bond purchase plans. Providing targeted support through liquidity facilities. The US Fed resumed and upgraded the rescue facilities it had used during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis to relieve the pressure on financial markets. It also established the paycheck protection program liquidity facility (PPPLF) and multiple structural facilities to engage in rescuing enterprises, individuals, and other market entities. The ECB introduced long-term COVID-19 pandemic emergency refinancing operations. Assessing and adjusting monetary policy frameworks. In 2020, the central banks of some advanced economies in succession conducted assessments of their monetary policy frameworks. In August, after completing its latest assessment, the US Fed declared it would revise its monetary policy framework aiming to achieve an inflation rate that averages 2 percent. It stated that its monetary policy response to real employment would depend on the shortfalls, instead of the deviations, from the maximum employment level, and it emphasized that employment judgments would be based on multiple dimensions. The ECB and the BOC are expected to complete their assessments of their monetary policy frameworks in 2021. Box 3 The Spillover Effect of Monetary Policies in the Major Economies Central banks in the major economies, including the US, the euro area, and Japan, have rolled out large-scale monetary stimulus measures since March, 2020 to respond to the shock of the COVID-19 pandemic that has affected economic development and financial markets. The balance sheets of the US Fed, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan expanded by 77 percent, 50 percent, and 23 percent respectively through 2020, and global liquidity remained extremely ample. The spillover effect of overseas accommodative monetary policies warrants our attention. In general, when major central banks adopt accommodative policies, the liquidity within these countries will leak across borders. In previous crises, as theturbulence in the international financial market easily triggered panic in the market, and funds flew back to the major developed economies amid heightened risk aversion, the impact of such leakage on policy effect was, to some extent, moderated. However, global liquidity that flew back to the major developed countries dwindled during this round of the COVID-19 response. For instance, foreign holdings of US treasuries grew by 3.3 percent in 2008 when the global financial crisis broke out, while such holdings decreased by 3.8 percent during the first 11 months of 2020. Comparatively, the current situation in China is sound, as it is the first country to contain the pandemic, to resume work and production, and to achieve positive economic growth. Overseas fund inflows to China’s bond market exceeded RMB1 trillion in 2020, among which long-term funds from overseas central banks accounted for over 60 percent, with government bonds and policy financial bonds as the main types of purchases. Of course, in the long run, as the pandemic gradually comes under control and the economic recovery becomes clear, the accommodative monetary policies in the major economies may end, and the direction of capital flows may change as well. For a super-large economy like China’s, this is normal, but we should also guard against the risks. As the second largest economy in the world, China made an average of 30 percent of an actual contribution to global economic growth over the past decade; it is no longer a passive receiver of the spillover effect of macro-policies from the advanced economies and it has its own macro policies manifesting such an effect. Moreover, China has been pursuing conventional monetary policies since 2020, and it is one of the few major economies to do so. Conventional monetary policies have the following three features: First, the interest rate remains within the normal range, not falling to zero or into negative territory; Second, the central bank’s balance sheet is basically stable, and the banks’ market-based function of money creation is brought into play normally and effectively; Third, the macro-leverage ratio and the growth pace of money and credit are far below the level during the global financial crisis responses in 2009. On balance, China fairly manages a long-tern equilibrium of stabilizing growth and preventing risks by pursuing a conventional monetary policy. In 2020, with the economy growing at 2.3 percent, China is the only major economy that has achieved positive growth, which is conducive to boosting a global economic recovery and to promote the normalization of monetary policies in other major economies. It was noted at the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee that we will establish a modern central banking system and will strengthen coordination of international macroeconomic policies. Improvements in the mechanism for the coordination, cooperation, and governance of international finance not only reflectstrengthened coordination of international macroeconomic policies but they also constitute an important part of the development of a modern central banking system. In the next stage, in accordance with the guiding principles of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference and from the perspective of improving the mechanism for the coordination, cooperation, and governance of international finance, we will strengthen the coordination of international monetary policies, advance the reform of the international monetary system and financial supervision, actively participate in the construction of a global financial safety net, improve the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism, and promote two-way opening up in the financial sector. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, the COVID-19 pandemic will remain the largest source of uncertainty for the global economy in 2021. Recently, the number of new global cases has remained high, and virus mutations have appeared in multiple locations, while the effectiveness and side-effects of the vaccines, and people’s willingness to get vaccinated, remain uncertain. These factors may continuously influence the economic recovery process. In addition, a long-lasting pandemic might lead to adjustments in industrial chains, supply chains, and the landscape of international trade and investment, which could deeply influence global labor productivity, the inflation rate, and other factors. Second, the sustainability of macroeconomic policies in the advanced economies faces challenges. The IMF estimated that in 2020 the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio in the advanced economies and the emerging market economies reached 13.3 and 10.3 percent, respectively, while the ratio of overall global public debt to GDP approached nearly 100 percent, which illustrates the challenge to maintain the strength of the fiscal stimulus. The major advanced economies have adopted accommodative monetary policies for a long time, with decreasing marginal policy utility, which in turn will worsen the problem of asset price bubbles, wealth inequalities, and debt burdens. Third, the risks in financial markets continue to accumulate. The overlap of pressures in the real economy and vulnerabilities in financial markets has led to an increase in the non-performing loans ratio for the banks in the advanced economies. Due to a lack of prudential supervision, the leveraging behavior of non-banking financial institutions may become an important source of potential risks. As the valuations in capital markets become detached from the economic fundamentals, the risks of market volatility rise. Fourth, there are risks from trade protectionism and geopolitics. In recent years, de-globalization has emerged with rising protectionism and unilateralism, while the pandemic and the economic recession it has caused have further strengthened introspective tendencies in some countries. Amid an increasingly complex international environment, instabilities and uncertainties have increases notably. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In 2020, facing the complex and serious situations at home and abroad, especially the shocks from the COVID-19 pandemic, departments in all regions adhered to the general guideline of making progress while maintaining stability in their work, and they made major strategic achievements to coordinate pandemic containment and economic and social development. With the steady recovery of the national economy, continuous development of industrial production, steady pickup of consumption and investment, robust momentum of exports, and stable employment on the whole, China is expected to be the only major economy in the world with positive economic growth. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in 2020 grew by 2.3 percent year on year to RMB101.6 trillion. By quarters, GDP in Q1 dropped by 6.8 percent year on year, while that in Q2, Q3, and Q4 grew by 3.2 percent, 4.9 percent, and 6.5 percent year on year respectively. 1. Consumption continuously improved, investments steadily rebounded, and foreign trade registered positive growth Residents’ income continuously rebounded, and consumption recovered steadily. In 2020, per capita disposable income registered RMB32189, up 4.7 percent year on year in nominal terms. It increased by 2.1 percent in real terms, slightly lower than economic growth. Residents’ income from wages and salaries recovered steadily, and the income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents. In 2020, total retail sales of consumer goods dropped by 3.9 percent year on year to RMB39.2 trillion, among which those in Q4 grew by 4.6 percent year on year and registered an acceleration of 3.7 percentage points from Q3. Sales of upgraded consumer goods and online retail sales continued their rapid growth. Fixed-asset investments rebounded steadily, and investments in the high-tech industry grew rapidly. In 2020, total fixed-asset investments increased by 2.9 percent year onyear to RMB51.9 trillion. In terms of sectors, the year-on-year growth of investments in infrastructure, the manufacturing sector, and real estate development registered 0.9 percent, -2.2 percent, and 7.0 percent, respectively. Investments in the high-tech industry grew by 10.6 percent, 7.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Specifically, investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector and the high-tech service sector grew by 11.5 percent and 9.1 percent year on year, respectively. Investments in social areas increased by 11.9 percent, among which investments in health care and education grew by 29.9 percent and 12.3 percent, respectively. The momentum of exports was robust, and the trade structure continued to improve. In 2020, imports and exports of goods grew by 1.9 percent year on year to RMB32.2 trillion. Specifically, exports grew by 4.0 percent year on year, with growth in November and December accelerating to 14.9 percent and 10.9 percent respectively, while imports decreased by 0.7 percent year on year. As a result, the trade surplus in goods posted RMB3.7 trillion. The trade structure improved continuously. In 2020, the share of imports and exports under general trade reached 59.9 percent, up 0.9 percentage points from 2019. Imports and exports of private enterprises grew by 11.1 percent year on year, accounting for 46.6 percent of total foreign trade, up 3.9 percentage points from 2019. Exports of machinery and electronics increased by 6 percent year on year, accounting for 59.4 percent of total exports, up 1.1 percentage points from 2019. In 2020, China’s top five trade partners were ASEAN, the EU, the US, Japan, and the ROK, and their trade with China grew by 7 percent, 5.3 percent, 8.8 percent, 1.2 percent, and 0.7 percent year on year respectively. China’s trade with countries along the Belt and Road grew by 1 percent to reach RMB9.37 trillion. Utilized foreign direct investment (FDI) hit a record high, with a further improved structure. In 2020, actually utilized FDI increased by 6.2 percent year on year to RMB999.98 billion. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the service industry grew by 13.9 percent to RMB776.77 billion, accounting for 77.7 percent of total FDI. FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 11.4 percent, among which that of the high-tech service industry grew by 28.5 percent. In 2020, outward investment cooperation remained stable. Outward direct investments (ODI) grew by 3.3 percent to USD132.94 billion, among which non-financial ODI edged down by 0.4 percent year on year to USD110.15 billion. In 2020, investment cooperation with countries along the Belt and Road made steady progress. Non-financial ODI in 58 countries along the Belt and Road grew by 18.3 percent yearon year to USD17.79 billion, accounting for 16.2 percent of total ODI over the same period, up 2.6 percentage points from 2019. In particular, ODI in the leasing/commercial services industry and the wholesale/retail industry witnessed year-on-year growth of 17.5 percent and 27.8 percent, respectively. Box 4 Rational Evaluation of Risks Concerning Household Debt The rising household leverage in China has recently attracted wide attention. The increase is mainly due to growing home loans, consumer loans, and credit card overdrafts, but part of it also represents the operating loans of self-employed businesses, which thereby require objective differentiation and a rational evaluation. At the same time, we need to be highly vigilant of debt sustainability and the potential risks caused by surging household leverage, and refrain from over-relying on consumer finance to boost consumption. The main difference between consumer debt and operating debt lies in a capability to generate revenue for repayment. Although household debt, which is largely consumption-oriented, may be an expedient way of financing, it tends to erode households’ future consumption capacity and therefore may become unsustainable, as consumption activities cannot generate revenue that covers debt obligations and repayment relies primarily on payroll earnings. By contrast, corporate debt is mostly business-related and it finances the purchase of labor, equipment, and raw materials for production and sales, which not only generates revenue for debt repayments but also bolsters consumption through job creation. According to some research, multi-national evidence shows that household debt hangover is worse than that of corporate debt. It should be noted, however, that if household debt finances business activities, then it resembles corporate debt, which makes it the key difference between China’s household leverage and that in other major economies. Therefore, when observing and comparing China’s household leverage, we should exclude the part that finances business activities. Around 20 percent of the household debt in China is business-related, the exclusion of which would put household leverage within a reasonable range compared with other economies. The operating debt in China’s household sector mainly consists of operating loans issued to self-employed businesses. It also includes consumer loansand credit card financing used by these businesses for operational purposes. According to BIS, as of end-H1 2020, the leverage ratio of the household sector in China was 59.1 percent, close to that in the eurozone and Japan. However, after removing the operating debt from the total household debt, the ratio drops to roughly 46 percent, which is still within a reasonable range in a global context.The risks of China’s household debt are generally manageable, although there is limited macro policy space. Against the background of “houses are for living in, not for speculation” and enhanced regulation of consumer finance, the growth of household debt has decelerated from 20 percent in previous years to the current 15 percent, and household leverage has also shown a deceleration. Given the large contribution of operating debt to household leverage, the traditionally high savings rate, the high down payment requirement, and the diversified household debt, the risks related to China’s household debt are still manageable. However, we should be vigilant of the rising leverage of the household sector since 2011. From end-2011 to H1 2020, the leverage increased more than 31 percentage points, leaving very little space for further expansion of household debt and therefore deserves close attention. We need to be highly vigilant of debt sustainability and potential risks due to surging household leverage. First, in terms of consumer finance, some consumer-debtors are irrational in that their prospective income does not match their repayment expenditures and they borrow and spend beyond their future repayment capability,thereby posing potential financial risks. In addition, should businesses expand their production in response to these credit-driven consumption demands, the problem of overcapacity will arise when household debt builds up and the consumer-debtors can no longer repay their debt. This is inconsistent with the need for high-quality development. Meanwhile, some financial institutions have overlooked the risks underlying consumer finance during the rapid expansion of consumer loans. This has led to a significant deterioration of client quality as well as to the prominent problems concerning multiple platforms lending to the same client and over-extending credit to related parties of a client. Since the beginning of 2020, there have been signs of higher non-performing ratios for credit card financing and consumer loans in certain banks. In general, facilitating the building of a new development paradigm entails emphasis on management of the demand side and adherence to a strategic focus of boosting domestic demand so as to stimulate consumption. However, it is inappropriate to expand consumption through an over-reliance on consumer finance. Financial innovations should proceed under prudential regulation, and more efforts should be put into promoting employment and improving social security, the income structure, and the consumption environment. Work should be done to combine the dual tasks of boosting domestic demand and deepening the supply-side structural reform, thereby enhancing the fundamental role of consumption in promoting high-quality economic development. 2. Agricultural production improved, industrial production continued to grow, and the service industry recovered gradually In 2020, the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 3.0 percent, 2.6 percent, and 2.1 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 7.7 percent, 37.8 percent, and 54.5 percent of GDP. The share of tertiary industry in total industry surpassed that of secondary industry by 16.7 percentage points, up 1.0 percentage point from 2019. China witnessed another bumper harvest of grain production and a rapid recovery of hog production. In 2020, the value-added of agriculture grew by 3.0 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.1 percentage points from 2019. Grain output recorded a new high and the annual output has been over 650 million tons for six years in a row. Hogs in stock continued a fast recovery and the decline in hogs available for slaughternarrowed significantly. At end-2020, hogs in stock increased by 31.0 percent year on year and saw quarter-on-quarter growth for five consecutive quarters. In 2020, hogs available for slaughter declined by 3.2 percent year on year. Specifically, the year-on-year growth of hogs available for slaughter turned positive in Q3 and growth in Q4 accelerated to 22.9 percent. Industrial production recovered gradually quarter on quarter, with the economic efficiency of enterprises continuously improved. In 2020, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 2.8 percent year on year, specifically, that in Q4 increased by 7.1 percent. In 2020, the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector saw rapid growth, namely, 7.1 percent and 6.6 percent respectively year on year. This was 4.3 percentage points and 3.8 percentage points higher than that of the IEDS, which played an important role in supporting economic development. In 2020, total profits of the IEDS increased by 4.1 percent year on year and maintained double-digit growth for seven consecutive months, particularly with year-on-year growth in December accelerating to 20.11 percent. According to the Entrepreneur Survey Report conducted in Q4 by the PBC, the Business Climate Index posted 55.8 percent, up 6.4 percentage points from Q3 and 0.2 percentage points from the same period of 2019. The Profitability Index registered 59.8 percent, up 2.5 percentage points from the same period of 2019. The service industry recovered steadily and the modern service industry showed sound growth momentum. In 2020, the Index of Service Production (ISP) was on par with that in 2019. Specifically, the ISP in Q4 increased by 7.7 percent year on year, accelerating by 3.4 percentage points from Q3. In 2020, the value-added of the service industry grew by 2.1 percent year on year, accounting for 54.5 percent of GDP, accelerating by 0.2 percentage points from 2019. In particular, the value-added of the service industry in Q4 grew by 6.7 percent year on year, which was on par with that in Q4 2019. The vitality of the modern service industry was continuously released. The value-added of the information communications/software/IT services sector, the financial sector, and the real estate sector increased by 16.9 percent, 7.0 percent, and 2.9 percent respectively year on year, which contributed to the acceleration in the total service industry by 2.7 percentage points. In December 2020, the Expected Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 60.1 percent, remaining in the expansion area for six consecutive months and demonstrating the strong confidence of enterprises in the development of the market. It should also be noted that due to the pandemic, although some service sectors such as the catering sector resumed, their growth was still relatively slower than that of other sectors. In 2020, revenue of the catering sector decreased by 16.6 percent year on year, decelerating by 7.3 percentagepoints from Q1–Q3 of 2020. 3. The growth of consumer prices decelerated and the decline in producer prices narrowed The growth of consumer prices decelerated. Due to factors such as the pandemic, the gradual recovery of the capacity for hog production, and the high base figure in H2 2019, the CPI had been on a rising trend for some time before falling thereafter, registering a year-on-year growth of 2.5 percent in 2020. Specifically, the growth of food prices grew by 10.6 percent year on year, accelerating by 1.4 percentage points from 2019. The growth of non-food prices grew by 0.4 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.0 percentage point from 2019. The core CPI (food and energy excluded) rose moderately by 0.8 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.8 percentage points from 2019. The decline in producer prices decelerated. In 2020, the Producer Price Index (PPI) mainly moved in the negative territory. However, as industrial production steadily recovered, market demand continuously picked up, and the industrial product prices gradually rose, the PPI in 2020 saw a U-shaped trend and then dropped by 1.8 percent year on year, an acceleration of 1.5 percentage points compared with 2019. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) dropped by 2.3 percent year on year, accelerating by 1.6 percentage points from 2019. In 2020, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI), monitored by the PBC, decreased by 1.2 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.2 percentage points compared with Q1–Q3 of 2020. 4. The decline in fiscal revenue decelerated, and employment generally improved The decline in fiscal revenue decelerated. In 2020, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB18.3 trillion and decreased by 3.9 percent year on year, decelerating by 6.9 percentage points compared with H1 2020. Specifically, tax revenue amounted to RMB15.4 trillion, down 2.3 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue reached RMB2.9 trillion, down 11.7 percent year on year. The domestic value-added tax, domestic consumption tax, and business income tax dropped by 8.9 percent, 4.3 percent, and 2.4 percent year on year, respectively, while the personal income tax increased by 11.4 percent year on year. Fiscal expenditures rebounded gradually. In 2020, expenditures in the national generalbudget saw an increase of 2.8 percent year on year to RMB24.6 trillion, accelerating by 8.6 percentage points compared with H1 2020. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures related to health care and social security/employment grew quickly, registering year-on-year growth of 15.2 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively. In 2020, budgetary revenue from nationwide government-managed funds totaled RMB9.3 trillion, up 10.6 percent year on year. Specifically, revenue from land sales rose by 15.9 percent year on year. Budgetary expenditures from nationwide government-managed funds increased by 28.8 percent year on year to RMB11.8 trillion. Employment was generally stable. At the beginning of 2020, the outbreak of the pandemic resulted in restrictions on economic activities and shutdowns of enterprises, with the job market severely affected. As the pandemic containment achieved positive results, enterprises resumed production and the job market gradually recovered, with employment continuously improving. In 2020, 11.86 million people were newly employed, which was noticeably higher than the expectation of above 9 million, and it fulfilled 131.8 percent of the annual target. In 2020, the surveyed unemployment rate in urban areas was 5.6 percent, lower than the set target of 6 percent. Employment pressures from rural migrants were eased and the employment of graduates was generally stable. The number of rural migrants in 2020 decreased by 1.8 percent year on year to 285.6 million, down 5.17 million from 2019. The average annual revenue of rural migrants increased by 2.8 percent year on year to RMB4,072. In December, the unemployment rate of employees aged between 20 and 24 with college diplomas or above was on par with that in the same period of 2019. 5. The balance of payments and external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. China’s current account surplus stood at USD168.7 billion in Q1–Q3 2020. To be specific, the surplus in trade in goods was USD340.2 billion, whereas the deficit in trade in services was USD116.8 billion. The capital and financial account deficit stood at USD73.8 billion. At end-December, foreign exchange reserves increased by 3.5 percent year on year to USD3.2165 trillion, up USD108.6 billion from end-2019. By end-September 2020, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.2944 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt balance was USD1.2956 trillion, accounting for 56 percent of the total external debt balance.6. Analysis by sector 6.1 The real estate sector In 2020, housing prices remained generally stable in China. Due to the pandemic, housing sales and investments in real estate development witnessed a decrease at the beginning of 2020 but have recovered continuously since March. At end-2020, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built housing prices and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 3.7 percent and 2.1 percent year on year respectively, decelerating 3.1 percentage points and 1.5 percentage points from end-2019. In 2020, the total floor area of sold units increased by 2.6 percent year on year, and housing sales increased by 8.7 percent year on year. In 2020, investments in real estate development grew by 7 percent year on year, decelerating by 2.9 percentage points from 2019. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 7.6 percent year on year, registering a deceleration of 6.3 percentage points from 2019 and accounting for 73.8 percent of total investments in real estate developmentThe growth of real estate loans decelerated. At end-2020, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 11.6 percent year on year to RMB49.6 trillion, a deceleration of 3.2 percentagepoints from end-2019. Outstanding real estate loans accounted for 28.7 percent of the total lending balance. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 14.5 percent year on year to RMB34.5 trillion, a deceleration of 2.2 percentage points from end-2019. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 8.2 percent year on year to RMB9.1 trillion, a deceleration of 6.4 percentage points from end-2019. 6.2 The high-tech manufacturing sector The high-tech manufacturing sector mainly refers to the manufacturing industry with intensive Research and Development (R&D) investments. As a high added-value subset of the manufacturing industry, it represents the trend of high-quality development, covering the manufacturing of pharmaceuticals, aerospace and equipment, electronics and communication equipment, computers and office equipment, medical equipment and instruments, and electronic chemicals. In recent years, under the active guidance of the national innovation-driven strategy, China’s high-tech manufacturing sector has witnessed improvements in quality and effect, accelerated progress, and continuous expansion of scale. In 2020, the pandemic dealt a blow to the high-tech manufacturing industry. However, as major strategic achievements were made in the coordination of pandemic containment with economic and social development, recovery of the high-tech manufacturing sector accelerated, which served as an important prop for economic growth. First, the scale of the sector expanded continuously. Year-on-year growth of the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector turned positive in March 2020 and stood at 7.1 percent in 2020, 4.3 percentage points higher than that of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS). Specifically, the value-added of medical equipment and instruments, of electronics and communication equipment, and of computers and office equipment grew by 12.1 percent, 8.8 percent, and 6.5 percent year on year, respectively, allowing this sector to play a greater role in driving the economy. Second, the economic benefits of the sector recovered steadily. In 2020, the profits of the high-tech manufacturing sector grew by 16.4 percent year on year, an acceleration of 3.5 percentage points from the first three quarters of 2020. Third, investment growth of the sector rebounded stably. In 2020, investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector grew by 11.5 percent, among which those in the pharmaceuticals manufacturing and computers and office equipment manufacturing sectors grew by 28.4 percent and 22.4 percent, respectively. Despite great achievements in the high-tech manufacturing sector, there are still various challenges. First, as the investments in fundamental R&D and key and core technologies are relatively insufficient, China’s industrial structure is at the low andmiddle ends of the global value chain, and its capability for independent innovation is in urgent need of improvement. Second, the share of the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector in GDP remains fairly low, which lags far behind that in the developed economies. Therefore, the role of the sector in driving the economy needs to be enhanced. Third, due to the pandemic, the global supply chain has become regional and localized. In addition, as global economic and trade frictions escalate, China’s high-tech companies are faced with suppression and sanctions from some countries, which pose a serious challenge to the upgrading of the high-tech manufacturing sector. Going forward, China will accelerate development of the high-tech manufacturing sector as required for high-quality development. On the one hand, China will adhere to the structural reform of the supply side, expand investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector, promote the high-tech manufacturing sector to move up the value chain, and guide and create new demand through innovation and high-quality supply. It is necessary to invest more in R&D, make more breakthroughs in key technologies, continue to focus on enhancing quality and effect, and strengthen the guidance of innovation. China will provide professional and medium-to-long-term funding support for sci-tech enterprises through innovating financial service models. On the other hand, China will attach importance to the combination of developing advanced manufacturing clusters and promoting the opening-up. It will continue to attract foreign investment into advanced manufacturing clusters, promote integration of the manufacturing industry into the international industrial chain, and guide and adapt to the great changes brought about by the restructuring of the global industrial chain. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy The year 2020 is a very unusual and extraordinary year. Facing severe and complicated international situations and the arduous tasks regarding domestic reform and stability, and especially the serious impact of COVID-19, the entire nation made concerted efforts under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, and was among the first countries to contain the pandemic, to resume work and production, and to return to a positive economic growth. China achieved significant strategic results in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development. The 13th Five-year Plan wrapped up smoothly, and China is on course to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects. The Chinese economy is steadily recovering. The economic growth recorded 6.5 percent year on year for Q4 2020 and 2.3 percent for the whole year, and the GDP in 2020 exceeded RMB100 trillion. China is the only major economy to record a positive economic growth and one of the few major economies that maintain a normal monetary policy. Looking beyond the near term, the fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run and high-quality development remain unchanged. The Chinese economy is returning to normal with stronger endogenous growth drivers, and the economic fundamentals have improved in general. The recent period has seen significantly rising industrial production and sustained export momentum. Investments in the manufacturing sector are recovering and consumption is in an overall recovery as well. Employment and people’s well-being are secured, market expectations are generally stable, and there are more positive factors in economic development. The financial sector has significantly improved the quality and efficiency of its support for the real economy and has continuously enhanced its support for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and private businesses, providing the real sector with significantly more perceivable benefits. Having achieved major progress in the critical battle against financial risks, the financial system is generally sound and capable of defusing various risks. The RMBexchange rate has been basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and the foreign exchange reserves remain above USD3 trillion. The economy has become more resistant to external shocks. Given that global economic and financial conditions are still complicated and severe, and there are many uncertainties regarding the pandemic and the external environment, the grounds for domestic economic recovery are not yet solid. Since the beginning of Q4 2020, multiple regions around the world have discovered coronavirus variants. COVID-19 cases resurged in major developed economies while the vaccination progress was slower than expected. The rising debt of the public and real sectors poses greater potential risks to financial markets, with the global liquidity being extremely excessive. There is still considerable pressure from imported infections and risks associated with the global economy and financial markets. This winter brought concentrated COVID-19 outbreaks to many places in China, which may cause uncertainties for a further recovery of consumption. The macro leverage ratio temporarily rose because of pandemic responses, and the credit risk of nonperforming loans may appear later, so there are still potential risks concerning regional finance in China. In addition, we must not overlook medium and long-term challenges, such as the accelerating aging of the population, insufficient technological innovation capacity, and increasing constraints on resources and the environment. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance awareness of opportunities and risks. The PBC will focus on taking care of its own matters by properly handling the relationship between reforms and macro-management, short-term and long-term considerations, as well as internal and external equilibria, so as to contribute to high-quality development. Consumer price growth is generally within a reasonable range, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. The CPI in 2020 dropped continuously on a seasonal basis. The CPI growth recorded 2.5 percent in 2020, which is basically within a reasonable range. In Q4 2020, the CPI growth dropped to near zero and occasionally into the negative territory, which was mainly the result of the rebounding of pandemic cases, the fluctuations in pork prices, and the high-base effect. Although the CPI will be further subject to holiday disruptions at the beginning of 2021, these factors are all momentary, and the CPI will likely rise again to a stable level as the base effect and supply disruptions subside. Meanwhile, due to stronger endogenous growth drivers and the continuous recovery of industrial production, the prices of the means of production have grown more rapidly since the beginning of Q4 2020. The PPI’s negative year-on-year growth narrowed further and is likely to turn positive in the short term. Despite this, short-term price movements deserve close attention giventhe uncertainties concerning the future path of the pandemic and the impact of containment measures on supply and demand. In the medium and long term, the Chinese economy is expected to witness a stable growth. Given that the aggregate supply and demand are basically in equilibrium, monetary policies remain sound, and monetary conditions are reasonable and appropriate, there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, the PBC will continue to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and will fully implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference. It will firmly implement the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council by adhering to the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and by following the requirements of the new development stage, applying the new development philosophy, and fostering a new development paradigm. Giving top priority to ensuring stability, the PBC will focus on what is important, defend the bottom line, and live up to its responsibilities in an effort to consolidate and further the success achieved in pandemic control as well as in economic and social development, while maintaining policy continuity, stability, and sustainability. Work will also be done to improve macroeconomic governance, to build a modern central banking system, to conduct a cross-cyclical policy design, to achieve a balance of economic aggregates, and to promote structural optimization as well as both internal and external equilibria. Moreover, the PBC will continue to do its part well in ensuring stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and in maintaining security in six areas, namely, employment, people's basic livelihood, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains and the normal functioning of primary-level governments, thereby contributing to a good start for the establishment of a new development paradigm and bringing on a new look. The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate, giving top priority to ensuring stability and refraining from taking sharp turns. At the same time, the PBC will manage the timing, intensity, and effectiveness of policy, properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention, and keep sustainable room for the conduct of a normal monetary policy. To pursue the objective of “maintaining the stability of the currency value and thereby promoting economic growth”, the PBC will improve the mechanism of money supply management, using a mix of monetary policy tools to keep liquidity adequate at areasonable level so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be basically in line with nominal economic growth and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. In the process, flexible adjustments will be made to the intensity, pace, and focus of policy to accommodate changes in the circumstances. The role of structural monetary policy tools in targeted liquidity provision will be effectively brought into play, while steps will be taken to build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the economy. The PBC will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system and deepening the loan prime rate (LPR) reform. It will also consolidate the achievements made in lowering real lending rates and will stabilize and reduce overall financing costs for enterprises. While giving play to the decisive role of market supply and demand in the formation of exchange rates and enhancing the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, the PBC will strengthen macro-prudential management to stabilize market expectations and will guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk- neutral so that the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. More efforts will be put into monitoring and analysis as well as expectation management in order to keep prices basically stable. To firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability and will resolve prudently the risks associated with individual institutions and the risks arising in key fields, while further steps will be taken to hold all relevant parties accountable and to broaden channels for the replenishment of bank capital. Moreover, work will be done to guide and create new demand with innovations and high-quality supply and to accelerate the establishment of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. First, the PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy that is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. It will employ a mix of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), open market operations (OMOs), central bank lending, and central bank discounts, to meet the reasonable demand of financial institutions for short-, medium- and long-term liquidity. Through targeted and effective operations, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level without adopting indiscriminate stimulus measures. The PBC will improve the long-term mechanism of liquidity, capital and interest rate constraints used for central bank adjustments of bank money creation so as to properly control the general valve of money supply and to keep economic growth close to its potential output growth. Work will be done to guide market rates to move around OMO rates and MLF rates. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for sustainable replenishment ofbank capital to support bank issuances of perpetual bonds, such as convertible perpetual bonds, and to step up support for capital replenishment by small and medium-sized banks via issuance of perpetual bonds, so that banks will be better able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Measures will be taken to improve macroeconomic governance, to optimize monetary policy objectives as well as fiscal, employment, industry, investment, consumption, environmental protection, regional and other policy objectives, and to promote a reasonable division of duties and an efficient synergy. Second, the PBC will make effective use of central bank lending, central bank discounts, and the monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy to bring into play their roles in targeted liquidity provision. On the one hand, the countermeasures introduced in extraordinary times will be adjusted prudently and follow-up arrangements will be made, while the two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy, i.e., the policy of deferring principal and interest repayments for micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured inclusive MSB loans, will remain in place. On the other hand, the PBC will innovate and improve the system of structural monetary policy tools, design the incentive compatibility mechanism in a targeted way, and guide financial institutions to ramp up support for those fields in conformity with the new development philosophy. It will continue to use inclusive central bank lending and central bank discount policies to increase financial support for sci-tech innovations, MSBs, and green development. In an effort to implement the important decisions on peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality, the PBC will attach importance to policy designs and planning and will establish policy incentives and constraints to channel financial resources to the fields of green development. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. Measures will be taken to improve the system for providing financial support for innovation and to develop fund chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby giving rise to a virtuous cycle and triangular interactions among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector, and industries to promote the industrialization and large-scale application of new technologies. The PBC will push ahead with the regulated development and innovation of supply chain finance by implementing supporting policies step by step in collaboration with the relevant agencies and providing targeted services to support the completeness and stability of supply chains and industrial chains. The rural financial services system will be improved. Financial support will be provided to ensure that the work done to consolidate and further the achievements of poverty eradication be linked up effectively with rural revitalization efforts, while financial support policies for regionslifted out of poverty will be kept generally stable. Credit supply will be increased to support key agricultural fields, such as development of the seed industry and food security. Measures will also be taken to broaden the range of collaterals according to laws and regulations and to innovate rural financial products and services. The PBC will push further ahead with the project aimed at enhancing commercial banks’ capacity to provide financial services for MSMEs, taking steps to improve external incentives and constraints as well as banks’ internal policy arrangements, and to foster, through the application of science and technology, a long-term mechanism whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism to make loans. Additionally, financial institutions will be guided to step up credit support for the manufacturing sector and other key fields. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices, and expectations and will maintain the continuity, consistency, and stability of real estate finance policies. It will also implement rules for prudential management of real estate finance and improve financial support policies for the rental of housing. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. To enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, it will improve the central bank policy rate system in which OMO rates are taken as short-term policy rates and MLF rates as medium-term policy rates, and it will advance the reform of money market benchmark rates so that market rates are guided to move around policy rates. Continued efforts will be made to deepen the LPR reform, to consolidate the achievements made in lowering real lending rates, and in the process to gradually give rise to market-oriented deposit rates. The self-regulatory mechanism for market rate pricing will play its part in regulating the conduct of deposit rate pricing while deposit management will be tightened, with locally incorporated banks prohibited from providing cross-regional deposit services. And the requirement will be reinforced that lending entities of all types give explicit indications of annualized loan rates so as to safeguard a level playing field in the market and to protect the rights and interests of consumers. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, maintain the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and explore the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. Work will be done to stabilize market expectations, to guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will steadily advance the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and facilitate the use of the RMB in cross-border tradeFifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental institution building in financial markets so that they can play an effective role in stabilizing growth, promoting structural adjustments, advancing reform, and guarding against risks. It will support bond financing by private enterprises and enhance the ability of the financial sector to serve the real economy. It will implement the Administrative Measures for Information Disclosures Regarding Corporate Debenture Bonds to promote a unification of standards. The mechanism of bond default risk prevention and resolution will be improved in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. The PBC will enhance coordinated regulation over financial market infrastructure and accelerate steps to advance the interconnectivity between bond market infrastructure so as to ensure that financial markets are generally safe and stable while performing efficiently. Efforts will be made to steadily move ahead with the two-way opening-up of the bond market and to introduce more medium and long-term investors. Sixth, the PBC will push further ahead with the reform of financial institutions and make continued efforts to improve corporate governance and optimize financial supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, more work will be done to deepen the reform of large commercial banks and to establish a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. Large banks will be guided to shift their focus of services to the primary level and increase efficiency so as to provide better services for MSBs and private enterprises. Through improvements of monetary, regulatory and tax rules, small and medium-sized banks and rural credit cooperatives will be encouraged to focus on their main duties and businesses and to reassume their roles in serving local needs and their original purposes, while an effective mechanism of checks and balances in governance will be established. Measures will be taken to reform and optimize development finance and policy finance and to carry out classified accounting so that they will be better able to support national strategies. Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability. It will safeguard financial security, improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, take quick action to shore up the weaknesses of regulatory institutions, and firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Work will be done to ensure that the development of financial innovations be brought under prudential regulation and to stabilize and improve the quality and competitiveness ofinclusive financial services. Stress tests fully covering the banking system will be conducted. To enhance the soundness of financial institutions and their sustainable management capacity, the PBC will support banks, particularly small and medium-sized banks, to replenish capital through multiple channels and improve their governance. Efforts will be intensified to set aside loss provisions for non-performing loans and carry out write-offs while deposit insurance institution building and the organizational structure will be improved. Endeavors to defuse risks will be advanced prudently, with particular attention paid to wrapping up ongoing risk resolutions. The PBC will further define the respective responsibilities of all concerned parties to see that they truly perform their duties and join efforts to resolve risks. A possible resurgence of risks must be contained. Under no circumstances will local risks be allowed to evolve into systemic risks, nor will regional risks be allowed to evolve into national risks.