Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2021, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, following the guiding principles of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference and implementing the requirements of the Report on the Work of the Government, the People's Bank of China (PBC) stuck to a sound monetary policy, which is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate, and it devoted to maintaining its continuity, stability, and sustainability. It placed greater priority on serving the real economy, and it balanced the needs of promoting an economic recovery and preventing risks. At present, liquidity is adequate at a reasonable level, money and credit are maintaining reasonable growth, and financial support for the real economy remains solid. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In Q1 2021, the PBC pursued a sound monetary policy that is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. By comprehensively using multiple policy tools to inject liquidity, including central bank lending, central bank discounts, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), and open market operations (OMOs), and to iron out short-term disturbances such as cash injections before and after the lunar new year, tax levies, and quarter-end factors in a timely manner, the PBC kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, averted any cash crunch ahead of the festival and excess liquidity afterwards, and maintained stable market expectations as well as smooth movement of money market interest rates. In the meanwhile, the PBC strengthened communications with the public in many ways and made monetary policy operations more targeted and effective. Short-term interest rates in the money market were guided to move around the 7-day reverse repo rate within a reasonable range, and policy rates were further exploited as a pivot. At end-March, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.5 percent, down 0.6 percentage points from the corresponding period of the previous year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the credit structure optimized and the lending rates at low levels Money and credit saw reasonable growth. With the deepening of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, significantly enhanced efficiency of monetary policy transmission and continuous rapid growth of credit supply buttressed the economic recovery and the overall momentum for stability and progress. At end-March, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 12.3 percent year on year to RMB186.4 trillion, increasing RMB8 trillion from the beginning of the year and RMB673.4 billion more than the increase in the corresponding period of 2020. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 12.6 percent year on year to RMB180.4 trillion, up RMB7.7 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an increase that was RMB574.1 billion larger than that during the corresponding period of the previous year. Credit supply at an appropriate pace ensured continuous, stable, and sustainable support for the real economy and boosted stamina to serve high-quality development. The credit structure continued to improve. Medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB4.5 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion. At end-March, medium and long-termloans to the manufacturing sector gained 40.9 percent, accelerating for seventeen consecutive months. In particular, high-tech manufacturing witnessed a year-on-year increase of 45.0 percent. Outstanding inclusive loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) grew by 34.3 percent year on year to RMB16.7 trillion, 4 percentage points higher than that at end-2020. These loans supported 35.27 million MSBs, an increase of 26.6 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rates on loans remained at low levels. In 2021, the PBC continued to release the potential of the LPR reform and give full play to its role in optimizing resource allocations. In a market-oriented approach, financial institutions are encouraged to allocate more financial resources to MSBs, to improve the competitiveness of MSBs in obtaining loans, and to cut profits in favor of the real economy. In March, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.85 percent and 4.65 percent, respectively, both equal to that in December 2020. The weighted average lending rate recorded 5.10 percent in March, remaining at a historic low. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 5.30 percent, down 0.18 percentage points year on year. The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.19 percentage points to 4.63 percent. This indicates that financial support for the real economy continues to yield positive results.In March, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 69.54 percent, 8.42 percent, and 22.03 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign currency deposits and loans dipped. In March, the weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within 3 months registered 0.14 percent and 0.55 percent, respectively, down 0.02 and 0.04 percentage points from December 2020. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.23 percent and 1.09 percent, up 0.01 percentage points and down 0.27 percentage points from December 2020, respectively.Deposits grew steadily. At end-March, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies in all financial institutions posted RMB227.2 trillion, up 10.1 percent year on year, 0.1 percentage points lower than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding RMB deposits registered RMB220.9 trillion, up 9.9 percent year on year, 0.3 percentage points lower than that at the end of the previous year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD956.8 billion, an increase of USD67.5 billion from the beginning of the year and an acceleration of USD59.9 billion year on year, which was against a backdrop of better economic fundamentals, a widened trade surplus, and a growing willingness on the part of enterprises to hold foreign exchange in China.III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew moderately At end-March, outstanding M2 recorded RMB227.6 trillion, up 9.4 percent year on year. Outstanding M1 registered RMB61.6 trillion, up 7.1 percent year on year. Outstanding M0 reached RMB8.7 trillion, up 4.2 percent year on year. The first quarter witnessed a net cash injection into the economy of RMB222.9 billion, a fall of RMB360.4 billion year on year. According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) reached RMB294.55 trillion at end-March, up 12.3 percent year on year and a deceleration of 1 percentage point over the end of the previous year. In Q1, the incremental AFRE reached RMB10.24 trillion on a cumulative basis with a decrease of RMB873.0 billion year on year, making it the second largest quarterly increase. Growth of AFRE remained generally stable with the following features. First, RMB loans saw a substantially larger year-on-year increase. Second, both entrusted loans and trust loans experienced net decreases, while undiscounted bankers’ acceptances saw a year-on-year increase. Third, the year-on-year increase of corporate bonds narrowed, while that of equity financing expanded. Fourth, affected by local government special bonds, government bond financing recorded a narrow year-on-year increase. Fifth, the increases of both asset-backed securities of depository financial institutions and of written-off loans edged up compared with the same period of the previous year.Box 1 Improving the Framework for Modern Monetary Policy The Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee proposed "building a modern central banking system," To build a modern central banking system, we need to improve the framework for modern monetary policy, support high-quality economic development, and foster a new development paradigm. A modern monetary policy framework consists of optimized monetary policy objectives, innovative monetary policy instruments, and smooth monetary policy transmission mechanisms. The central bank needs to constantly innovate its monetary policy instrument system, give full play to the role of policy tools, improve the transmission efficiency of monetary policy, and achieve the objectives of monetary policy, all of which are expected to be combined into an organic whole. 1.Sticking to the ultimate objective of currency stabilization and optimizing the anchoring of the intermediary objective According to the Law on the People’s Bank of China, the ultimate objective of monetary policy is “to maintain the stability of currency value so as to promote economic growth”. The key to price stability lies in maintaining an aggregate monetary supply as appropriate. As China gears into high-quality development, its economic growth turns to be more innovation-driven. Therefore, growth of money supply compatible with development of the real economy will be more in line with nominal economic growth, which calls for supporting high-quality development with moderate growth of money supply. The Central Economic Work Conference in 2020 and the 14th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development and Long-Range Objectives through the Year 2035 proposed that growth of money supply and AFRE should be generally aligned with nominal economic growth, thus clearly defining the “anchor” of the monetary policy framework. The anchoring of the intermediary objective is conducive to formulating appropriate cross-cycle policies and stabilizing monetary aggregates in the long run. Based on the changes in the macro-economic situation, it also contributes to the convergence of growth of M2 and AFRE toward the nominal economic growth underlying potential output growth, which, therefore, provides a more scientific and rational anchor for the implementation of macro policies. Moreover, it also helps to guide the formation of reasonable and stable market expectations. Embedded with a stabilizing mechanism for the macro leverage ratio, the anchoring of the intermediary objective is conducive to achieving a long-term equilibrium between stabilizing growth and preventing risks. In the meanwhile, the PBC will increase the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and strike abalance between internal and external equilibria. 2.Improving the operational target system of the central bank and smoothing the channels for monetary policy transmission In recent years, the PBC has deepened the market-based interest rate reform, promoted the formation mechanism for the LPR, and significantly raised the transmission efficiency of monetary policy. As the pricing benchmark of the credit market, the LPR plays an important role in adjusting the demand and supply of credit, thus affecting money supply. Keeping the LPR at a reasonable level helps stabilize the “anchor” of money supply. The LPR is formed with reference to the quotations based on policy rates and in a market-based manner. The PBC guides the market rates represented by the DR007 to move around the policy rates by improving the policy rate system with the OMO rates as the short-term policy rates and the MLF rates as the medium-term policy rates. The market-based interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, which applies throughout the process from the policy rates to the LPR and then to the real lending rates, is further improved to adjust the demand and supply of funds and the allocation of resources and to achieve the objectives of monetary policy. It is worth noting that there are two types of practices with regard to the operational targets of the central banks’ monetary policies globally. One is to take market rates as the operational target and to guide the market rates to move within a range of the operational target through the adjustment of liquidity. The other is to set the interest rates of monetary policy instruments as the central bank’s policy rates, or operational targets. Therefore, the operational targets, policy rates, and interest rates of the monetary policy instruments are integrated. In the wake of the 2008 gobal financial crisis, the advantage of the second practice in improving the effectiveness and transmission efficiency of monetary policy was more apparent and gradually became the mainstream. The PBC also adopts the more direct second practice in setting up its operational target system. When observing the orientation of monetary policy, the market and the public only need to observe whether the policy rates have changed and they should avoid paying excessive attention to the volume of open market operations, the transaction rate of an individual institution, or the interest rate at a certain point of time, which may be disturbed by short-term factors. 3.Innovating monetary policy instruments and improving the mechanism for money supply management In terms of the aggregates, the PBC improves the long-term mechanism for adjusting the liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on banks’ money creation. Targeting the banks, which are direct money creators, the PBC employs a mix of monetary policy instruments so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The PBCpromotes banks to replenish capital through multiple channels by means of bank-issued perpetual bonds. Moreover, the PBC promotes the LPR reform, removes the implicit floor of interest rates, guides the downward movement of lending rates, relieves the liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints faced by banks in money creation, and keeps the growth of money supply and AFRE basically in line with nominal economic growth. In terms of the structure, the PBC sets up a system that enables the financial sector to provide effective support for the real economy. The PBC continues to improve the structural monetary policy instrument system, and links the volume and price of liquidity with the banks’ deposit creation from loans through the design of an incentive-compatible mechanism. In accordance with the needs of economic development at different stages, the PBC adjusts its policy priorities dynamically and guides financial resources to flow into key areas and weak links of the national economy, such as scientific and technological innovations, micro and small businesses, as well as green development, so as to promote the sustainability and resilience of the economy. In general, in terms of monetary policy, the PBC sticks to the ultimate target of currency stability, improves the intermediary target of keeping the growth of money supply and AFRE basically aligned with nominal economic growth, and integrates the policy targets with a sound market-based mechanism for interest rate formation and transmission and a better mechanism for money supply management, all of which contribute to the construction of a modern monetary policy framework. Being more open, transparent, and direct, the framework improves the efficiency of communications between the central bank and the public, reduces the costs of communications, effectively guides expectations, enhances the fairness of public access to information, and increases the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission, which is conducive to creating a favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and cross-border RMB transactions continued to grow Since the beginning of 2021, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, with market expectations generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q1, the RMB exchange rate appreciated against the basket of currencies. At end-March, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index andthe RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 96.88 and 95.66, respectively, up 2.15 percent and 1.52 percent from end-2020. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), at end-March 2021, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 2.15 percent and 2.10 percent from end-2020, respectively. From 2005 when reform of the exchange-rate formation mechanism commenced to end-March 2021, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated by 40.63 percent and 54.55 percent, respectively. In Q1, the RMB exchange rate depreciated slightly against the US dollar. At end-March, the central parity of the RMB against the USD was 6.5713, down 0.71 percent from end-2020, appreciating by 25.95 percent on a cumulative basis from the launch of the reform of the exchange-rate formation mechanism in 2005. In Q1, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB exchange rate against the USD was 3.9 percent. In Q1 2021, cross-border RMB settlements totaled RMB9 trillion, up 48 percent year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB4.6 trillion and RMB4.3 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 17 percent year on year to RMB1.7 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB1.3 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and other items registered RMB412.97 billion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account posted RMB7.3 trillion, up 58 percent year on year.Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q1 2021, the PBC resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and kept the sound monetary policy flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. The PBC conducted open market operations in a targeted manner, advanced market-based reforms of the interest rate and the exchange rate, further leveraged the targeted guidance role of structural monetary policy instruments and channeled more funds into key areas and weak links, including scientific and technological innovations, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and green development, thus fostering a favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development. I. Conducting open market operations effectively Conducting open market operations in a targeted manner. In Q1 2021, many uncertainties, particularly considerable disruptions brought about by the Spring Festival, affected liquidity supply and demand in the banking system. Amid Covid-19 prevention and control, the PBC fully analyzed the factors affecting supply and demand of funds, such as cash injections during the Spring Festival and fiscal revenue and expenditures, planned in advance, fine-tuned dynamically, conducted operations in a targeted manner, and guided market expectations through various means, such as explaining the central bank’s operations around the Spring Festival in the Announcement on Open Market Operations and a number of other documents. As a result, market liquidity was kept stable, with a record low level of liquidity supply before the Spring Festival. Meanwhile, short-term reverse repo operations conducted before the Spring Festival all matured within just several trading days after the Festival, and liquidity was maintained at a level that was “neither tight before the Festival nor loose after the Festival.” Seven-day reverse repo operations were conducted successively in appropriate amounts after the Spring Festival in the open market to maintain a precise balance of fund supply and demand and to ensure liquidity stability at the end of the quarter. Guiding market rates to move around the central bank policy rates. Since the beginning of 2021, both the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) rate and the reverse repo rate have remained unchanged, demonstrating a sound monetary policy stance. Meanwhile, the PBC improved the continuity of open market operations,steadily sent short-term policy rate signals through daily operations of the 7-day reverse repo, and guided short-term money market rates to move around the open market operation rates within a reasonable range. The open market operation rates have played an increasingly important role as the pivotal short-term market rates. In Q1 2021, the weighted average rate on the 7-day repo between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) averaged 2.21 percent, very close to the open market operation rate of 2.2 percent on the 7-day reverse repo. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q1 2021, the PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. At present, the PBC conducts CBS operations regularly on a once-in-a-month basis, and these operations play a positive role in improving liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially small and medium-sized banks. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q1 2021, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. The regular issuance of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong not only enriched RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in the Hong Kong market but also drove both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market, thus promoting the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market. In Q1 2021, offshore RMB bond issuances, other than the RMB-denominated central bank bills issued in Hong Kong, registered roughly RMB48 billion, a year-on-year increase of 50 percent. Moreover, the RMB offshore market saw increasingly brisker transactions.Box 2 The Central Bank Conducts Open Market Operations in a Targeted Manner In recent years, the framework of China’s monetary policy operations have continued to improve, open market operations (OMOs) have become more scientific, transparent, flexible, and targeted, and market liquidity has remained appropriate and abundant. The rates of open market operations reflect signals of the central bank’s policy rates, play a growingly pivotal role in the market, and effectively guide money market rates to move around the central bank’s policy rates. The key to observing open market operations is the price rather than the amount. In Q1 2021, the PBC conducted open market operations in a targeted manner, effectively offsetting seasonal disruptions such as the Spring Festival and the end of a quarter. Due to Covid-19 prevention and control and other factors during the Spring Festival, liquidity conditions differed significantly from previous years, and uncertainties grew as well. The PBC followed up on the latest developments in Covid-19 prevention and control in real time, strengthened relevant analysis and research, and made rolling forecasts for cash injections, fiscal revenue and expenditures, demand for funds in the market, and other factors. Through measures that aimed at “planning in advance, fine-tuning dynamically, conducting operations ina targeted manner, and guiding expectations,” the PBC achieved its operational target, i.e., maintaining stable market rates before and after the Spring Festival. Before the Spring Festival, a total of RMB430 billion was injected into the market for the holiday, the lowest injection amount in recent years. Meanwhile, to enhance the transparency of monetary policies and to stabilize market expectations, the PBC explained in advance in the Announcement on Open Market Operations that “cash demand before the Spring Festival is expected to decrease notably and fiscal expenditures are expected to increase by a relatively large amount,” enabling the market to better understand the central bank’s policy implications. In practice, the money market before and after the Spring Festival remained stable, and the DR007 remained close to the open market operation rate of 2.2 percent on 7-day reverse repos, reflecting a sound monetary policy stance that is neither loose nor tight, and thus the central bank’s open market operations became more targeted and forward-looking. At present, it has become a regular practice for the PBC to conduct MLF operations at a fixed time in the middle of each month and to conduct open market operations successively each day. As a result, the efficiency of monetary policies has improved significantly as the PBC has continuously released policy rate signals and has guided market rates to move around policy rates. Meanwhile, when conducting open market operations, the PBC gave priority to short-term benchmark rates in the money market, such as the DR007, and gave full consideration to cash injections and withdrawals, fiscal revenue and expenditures, market demand, and other factors to flexibly adjust the size and maturity of OMOs. Therefore, when observing the central bank’s open market operations, rather than focusing too much on the amount of OMOs, the market should focus more on the policy rates including OMO rates and MLF rates as well as the movement of the benchmark market rates over a certain period of time, and it should refrain from over-interpreting the monetary policy stance. At the beginning of this year, money market rates rose for a short period of time, as short-term liquidity demand grew by a relatively large margin amid loose market expectations. Compared with other developing countries, the volatility of China’s money market rates was not high. Moreover, moderate fluctuations of market rates also show that the market mechanism plays its part with normal pricing functions. With the deepening of the market-based interest rate reform, China has gradually developed a central bank policy rate system, with the MLF rates and the open market operational rates serving as medium-term and short-term policy rates respectively, and the central bank operation rates have gradually played pivotal roles. The movement of market rates around the central bank policy rates shows that the policy rates not onlyguide markets rates effectively but also fully reflect changes in market supply and demand for funds, demonstrating that the market mechanism has played a decisive role in the formation of interest rates. Meanwhile, in light of the macro economic and financial situations and monetary policy objectives, the central bank sets the policy rates and guides the movement of market rates, which not only meets the needs of a central bank to fulfill its functions in monetary management but also embodies the philosophy that monetary policies serve the real economy with the people as the center. Going forward, in line with the requirement that the sound monetary policy should be kept flexible and targeted, and at a reasonable and appropriate level, and adhering to the principle that stability should be made a top priority, the PBC will continue to ensure an appropriate aggregate monetary supply, deliver a good cross-cycle liquidity arrangement, conduct open market operations in a targeted manner, maintain an appropriate and abundant level of liquidity in the market, improve the market-based interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, and guide market rates to move around policy rates, thus providing a favorable liquidity environment for the building of a new development paradigm. II. Timely conducting Standing Lending Facility and Medium-term Lending Facility operations Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. An appropriate supply of medium- and long-term liquidity was ensured, giving full play to the signaling and guiding functions of the medium-term policy rate. In Q1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB800 billion of MLF operations, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.95 percent. At end-March, the outstanding MLF registered RMB5.35 trillion, RMB200 billion more than that at the beginning of the year. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner. The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was met in the full amount. In Q1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB47.5 billion SLF operations, and the balance of SLF operations registered RMB6.4 billion at end-March. The SLF played its role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, thus promoting smooth performance of the money market. At end-March, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates were 3.05 percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent,III. Further improving the macro-prudential policy framework The role of the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In Q1 2021, in line with the requirements for the key tasks deployed at the Central Economic Work Conference, the PBC further improved the framework of the MPA and attached more importance to the assessment requirements for banks in terms of supporting the key areas and weak links in the real economy. Through adjusting and optimizing the assessment indicators in a dynamic manner, the PBC guided financial institutions to further enhance their support in issuing loans to inclusive MSBs and medium and long-term loan to the manufacturing sector. Meanwhile, non-local deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks were included in the MPA, thus safeguarding the competitive order in the deposit market and maintaining stable debt costs of banks. The macro-prudential adjustment coefficients were optimized. First, the Notice of the PBC and the SAFE on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Parameter for Cross-border Financing of Companies (Yinfa No.5 [2021]) was released, lowering the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing of non-financial companies from 1.25 to 1. Second, the Notice of the PBC and the SAFE on Adjusting the Macro-prudential Adjustment Coefficient for Domestic Companies Extending Overseas Loans (Yinfa No.2 [2021]) was issued, raising the macro-prudential adjustment coefficient for overseas loans issued by domestic companies from 0.3 to 0.5. The management system for the real estate loan concentration was put into place in an orderly manner. Following the establishment of the real estate loan concentration management system at end-2020, the PBC, in collaboration with the CBIRC, directed their provincial-level branches to appropriately set the management requirements for the real estate loan concentration of locally incorporated banks, and urged commercial banks whose concentration level had exceeded the cap to formulate adjustment schemes for the transition period. Currently, the credit structure has been optimized in an orderly manner, and the management system for the real estate loan concentration has entered a phase of conducting and implementing a normal policy.The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was improved. The PBC, jointly with the CBIRC, drafted the Additional Regulatory Rules on Systemically Important Banks (Trial) (Exposure Draft) (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), and solicited public opinion starting from April 2. The Rules, as a general framework for additional regulation of systemically important banks, specified additional regulatory requirements in terms of an indicator system, recovery and resolution schemes, and prudential regulatory measures. The regulatory system for financial holding companies (FHCs) was improved. Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC has made proactive efforts to conduct administrative approvals of FHCs. On March 31, it released the Interim Regulations on Filing-based Management of Directors, Supervisors, and Senior Executives of Financial Holding Companies (Order No.2 [2021] of the PBC) (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations). The Regulations clarified that the PBC should perform filing-based management of directors, supervisors, and senior executives of FHCs and specified the eligible conditions for personnel and the relevant filing procedures. In addition, the PBC reinforced appointment management so as to guard against the risks associated with personnel in key positions by regulating behavior, such as holding concurrent posts, performing acting duties, and publicizing personnel information. IV. Actively leveraging the role of structural monetary policy instruments The PBC actively used central bank lending to support rural development, central bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other tools to guide financial institutions to step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy, such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture, rural areas, and rural people as well as poverty alleviation. The role of central bank lending was further brought into play in providing targeted liquidity and serving as positive incentives so as to underpin and consolidate the effective links between the achievements of poverty eradication and rural revitalization. Good use was made of central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects to increase credit supply to the “three autonomous regions”, i.e., Tibet, the four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, the areas in the four provinces with large Tibetan populations, and the “three autonomous prefectures”, i.e., Linxia in Gansu, Liangshan in Sichuan, and Nujiang in Yunnan, and to lower the financing costs in these areas as well as to consolidate and expand the achievements of povertyeradication. In Q1, central bank lending for special poverty alleviation projects was issued in the amount of RMB8.8 billion, with the balance reaching RMB45.8 billion at end-March. As of end-March, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development registered RMB442.2 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB929.5 billion and RMB209.0 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB574.4 billion. In Q1, the PBC made a net withdrawal of PSLs in the amount of RMB41.0 billion from policy and development banks, with the outstanding PSL registering RMB3.1940 trillion at end-March. The TMLFs maturing in Q1 were rolled over in the form of MLFs. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding source for financial institutions to expand their credit supply to MSBs and private firms with preferential interest rates. On January 15, the PBC conducted one-year MLF operations totaling RMB500 billion, with an interest rate of 2.95 percent, including the rolling-over of the TMLFs maturing in Q1. The instrument can be rolled over for up to 3 years. At end-March, the outstanding TMLFs totaled RMB56.1 billion. With highlighted characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy were continuously promoted with the aim of bolstering the development of MSMEs. In line with the arrangements made at the executive meeting of the State Council, on March 30 the PBC, jointly with CBIRC, Ministry of Finance (MOF), National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), issued the Notice on Relevant Issues Concerning Further Extending the Implementation Periods for the Policy of Deferring Principal and Interest Repayments of Inclusive MSB Loans and for the Support Policy for Unsecured Loans (Yinfa No.81 [2021]), so as to ensure the continuity, stability, and sustainability of the policies. By extending the application period of two monetary-policy instruments directly supporting the real economy to December 31, 2021, the PBC maintained support for the MSBs and leveraged the policies in stabilizing employment. From the beginning of 2020 to end-March 2021, banking institutions nationwide deferred payments totaling RMB9.2 trillion of loan principals and interest repayments and issued cumulative inclusive unsecured MSB loans totaling RMB5.3 trillion.V. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reform Financial support to keep businesses and employment stable was enhanced. A symposium was held on adjusting the credit structure of major nationwide banks. The PBC strengthened policy guidance, encouraged banks to continuously improve financial services to MSBs, and promoted MSB financing featuring “increased volume, lowered price, improved quality, and expanding coverage.” Banks were encouraged to increase the supply of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector so as to promote its high-quality development. Effective support was provided to consolidate and expand the achievements of poverty eradication. In terms of poverty alleviation, the “Four Withouts” requirement was strictly followed, i.e., lifting areas out of poverty without loading off responsibilities, without abolishing policies, without ceasing support, and without removing supervision. Major financial support policies were kept generally stable, the role of central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and serving as a positive incentive was continuously brought into play, and financing costs were reduced for agriculture, rural areas, and rural people. Micro-credit loans were effectively provided to people out of poverty. Secured loans for start-ups and student loans were continuously implemented. Efforts were made to provide subsequent financial services following the residents’ removal from impoverished areas and to carry out research on strengthening inputs of financial resources into key counties to assist in the project of national rural revitalization. Resource inputs were further enhanced to support rural revitalization. Measures were taken to provide effective financial services for key areas, such as spring farming, tillage preparation, grain security, seed industry development, and high-standard farmland construction. The PBC supported loan businesses secured by pledges or collateral, including agricultural machinery and tools, greenhouse facilities, the right of contracted rural land management, and it encouraged financial institutions to issue special financial bonds for agriculture, rural areas, and rural people in an attempt to expand the sources of funding with low costs. VI. Further deepening the market-based interest rate reform The PBC continued to unleash the potential of reform in reducing loan interest rates,optimized regulation of deposit interest rates and pushed actual loan rates to go further downward. First, with continued progress in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and use of the LPR, the financing costs of enterprises witnessed an obvious decline. Second, order in the credit market was regulated. In March 2021, the PBC issued an announcement requiring all banks to explicitly indicate the annualized interest rates of their loan products and specifying the interest calculation rules so as to protect the rights of financial consumers to be informed. Third, the PBC strengthened deposit management, regulated the pricing of deposit rates, and banned locally incorporated banks from absorbing non-local deposits. The PBC explicitly required financial institutions to stop new issuances of deposit products with periodic interest payments and urged them to conduct the pricing in a scientific and rational way so as to maintain competitive order in the deposit market. The PBC incorporated non-local deposits absorbed by locally incorporated banks into the MPA and forbade locally incorporated banks from absorbing non-local deposits through various channels, with the outstanding balance settled when coming due. Until now, financial institutions have basically completed rectification of deposit products with periodic interest payments. Most locally incorporated banks have halted the business of absorbing non-local deposits, with the balance brought down in an orderly manner. This will help maintain the stability of the banks’ costs in assuming debts and will create a favorable environment for promoting the market-based interest rate reform and the steady decline in the comprehensive financing costs for enterprises. VII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It maintained the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate in adjusting the macro economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q1 2021, the highest and lowest CNY central parities were 6.4391 and 6.5713, respectively, against the USD. During the 58 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 27 days and depreciated on 31 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation were 1.00 percent (648 bps) and 0.83 percent (543 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rates against other major international currencies floated in twoways. At end-March 2021, the central parities of the RMB against the euro and the Japanese yen had appreciated 4.81 percent and 6.18 percent respectively from end-2020, while the RMB central parity had depreciated 0.71 percent and 1.56 percent against the dollar and the pound during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism commenced in 2005, the RMB has appreciated by a cumulative total of 25.95 percent, 30.01 percent, and 22.68 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen through end-March 2021. Direct RMB trading was buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and to facilitate bilateral trade and investment.As of end-March, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB60.862 billion, and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD512million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment. VIII. Promoting resolution of financial risks in a prudent and orderly manner and deepening the reform of financial institutions Risk resolution and reform and restructuring of small and medium-sized financial institutions have been promoted in an orderly manner. The PBC strove to ease the impact of the pandemic and achieved crucial progress and important initial results in the resolution of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions. The reform and restructuring plan of Hengfeng Bank was carried out smoothly, and the risk resolution, reform, and restructuring of Jinzhou Bank was basically completed so as to ensure the sound operation of the financial system during the critical and sensitive period and to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Risk resolution of the Baoshang Bank (BSB) was advanced steadily and orderly. Since the takeover of the BSB, there has been steady progress, breaking the rigid payments in an orderly manner and completing asset and capital verifications on schedule. On November 23, 2020, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court ruled to accept the bankruptcy petition of the BSB, and it appointed a liquidation group as the administrator of the BSB. On January 12, 2021, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court held a creditors’ meeting for the first time, and the administrator completed a review of the rights of 743 creditors. On February 7, the Beijing No.1 Intermediate People’s Court issued its ruling on the BSB’s bankruptcy. Equities of the former shareholders were cleared, and large-denomination creditors bore part of the losses, which means risk resolution of the BSB has been basically completed. Going forward, following the delivery of assets and alteration of the body of proceedings and arbitration, the administrator will complete the de-registration of the BSB and its affiliates as soon as possible. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC advanced the reform plans for development and policy financial institutions across the board to redefine their responsibilities and the scope of their business, improve corporate governance, strengthen the constraints and incentive mechanism, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policyfinancial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control. IX. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements The pilot program of trade facilitation was advanced to expand the coverage and raise the quality. The pilot areas and business scope were expanded steadily and orderly, business procedures were optimized, and market participants were guided to continuously improve their credit rating, administrative capability, and internal control. Until now, the pilot program has been expanded to 22 areas. Facilitation of individuals’ foreign exchange business was promoted. The State Administration of Foreign Exchange issued the Notice on Further Promoting Facilitation of Individual Foreign Exchange Business under the Current Account (Huifa〔2021〕13), further optimizing the filling items and methods and enhancing the filling efficiency. Administration of the foreign exchange market was strengthened. The fostering of the capability of off-site monitoring was enhanced and continuous efforts were made to severely crack down on illegal financial activities, such as underground banks and cross-border gambling. Emphasis was placed on investigating false and deceptive transactions so as to maintain a healthy order in the foreign exchange market. In Q1 2021, a total of 661 cases violating the regulations of the foreign exchange administration were handled, with total fines amounting to RMB216 million. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In Q1 2021, the financial market operated generally smoothly, with firm support for the real economy. The money market remained stable, with interest rates fluctuating within a reasonable range and market transactions growing in a steady manner. The bond market featured declined bond coupon rates, narrowed credit spreads, increased bond issuances, and active cash bond transactions. The stock market index fell after arise, and both turnover and the amount of funds raised witnessed year-on-year surges. I. Financial market overview 1. The money market operated in a steady manner The money market interest rate was stable. In March, the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.01 percent, higher than that in end-2020 and getting close to that in end-2019. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond repos among depository institutions posted 1.91 percent, 10 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. In March, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending posted 2.01 percent. At end-March, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.12 percent and 2.25 percent, respectively. Market transactions experienced steady growth. In Q1 2021, the volume of trading of bond repos on the interbank market reached RMB223.2 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB3.7 trillion and a year-on-year increase of 8.5 percent, down 9.1 percentage points from that in 2020. The volume of cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB29.1 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB485.1 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 11.6 percent. In Q1 2021, the volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 20.7 percent year on year to RMB75.8 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses operated steadily. In Q1 2021, 7,489 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB5.6 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB35.1 trillion. At end-March, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB12.0 trillion. In Q1 2021, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.83 percent, 11 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 20,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions in Q1 2021, raising RMB3.8 trillion, with an increase of RMB200 billion year on year. The interest rate swap market witnessed orderly development. In Q1 2021, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 75,000 transactions, increasing 23.0 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB5.4 trillion, an increase of 24.8 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB3.6 trillion, accounting for 68.0 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 85.7 percent and 13.2 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q1 2021, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 290 transactions, withRMB28.85 billion of the notional principal.The loan prime rate (LPR) interest rate option business developed steadily. The LPR interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market in March 2020, and the fixing repo rate (FDR) options was newly added to the interbank market on March 29, 2021. In Q1 2021, a total of 177 interest rate option transactions were concluded, totaling RMB23.64 billion. Specifically, 29 were interest rate swap transactions, amounting to RMB1.52 billion of the notional principal, 148 were interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB22.12 billion of the notional principal, 112 were LPR interest rate transactions, totaling RMB 19.79 billion of the notional principal, and 65 were FDR interest rate transactions, amounting to RMB3.85 billion of the notional principal. 2. Coupon rates of bonds declined while bond issuances expanded On the whole, coupon rates of bonds declined. In March 2021, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 3.22 percent, 3 basis points lower than that in December 2020. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank was 3.52 percent, 13 basis points lower than the rate in December 2020. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.56 percent, 66 basis points lower than the rate in December 2020. Government securities yields went up slightly. At end-March, yields on 1-year and 10-year government securities increased by 10 basis points and 5 basis points to 2.57 percent and 3.19 percent from end-2020, respectively. Credit spreads narrowed, withcredit spreads on 3-year AAA and AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills narrowing by 16 basis points and 29 basis points from end-2020, respectively.Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In Q1, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 16.7 percent, or RMB2 trillion, year on year to RMB14.1 trillion, most of which were financial bonds, which increased by RMB1.9 trillion. At end-March, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB120 trillion, an increase of 16.6 percent year on year. The volume of cash bond transactions on the interbank market decreased, while that on the stock exchanges maintained growth. In Q1, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB51.3 trillion, registering a decrease of 1.5 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of bond trading on the interbank market was RMB46.1 trillion, representing a decrease of 5.5 percent year on year. The value of bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB5.2 trillion, an increase of 56.5 percent year on year.3. Bill financing increased while maintaining stability, and interest rates in the bill market went up The bill acceptance business maintained stability. In Q1, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB6.1 trillion, rising 1.4 percent year on year. At end-March, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.1 trillion, increasing by 4.9 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances remained stable, decreasingby RMB2.5 billion from the beginning of this year. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 68.6 percent were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing was basically stable. In Q1, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB11.4 trillion, growing 3.8 percent year on year. At end-March, the balance of bill financing was RMB7.9 trillion, down 4.5 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.4 percent of total outstanding loans, down 0.8 percentage point year on year. 4. Stock indices first went up and then went down, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year on year In Q1, stock indices went up before going down, and then, after mid-March, they stabilized. From the beginning of this year to the Spring Festival, due to the continuous consolidation of the momentum for restorative economic growth and the rise of overseas stock markets, the major stock indices in Shanghai and Shenzhen experienced a choppy rise. In February, the highest closing points of the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index posted 3,732 points and 16,293 points, respectively. After that, the A-share market retreated. At end-March, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,442 points, decreasing 0.9 percent from end-2020. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 13,779 points, decreasing 4.8 percent from end-2020. Turnover on the stock markets expanded. In Q1, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB54.9 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB947.2 billion, an increase of 9.9 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets surged significantly year on year. In Q1, a cumulative RMB340.4 billion was raised, increasing 142.6 percent year on year and providing solid support for the real economy. 5. Growth of premium income accelerated, while growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down In Q1, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB1.8 trillion, up 7.8 percent year on year, an acceleration of 1.7 percentage points from the same period of the previous year. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB395.1 billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 30.4 percent. Specifically, total propertyinsurance claims and benefit payments increased 35 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went up by 27 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-March, total assets in the insurance sector increased 11.7 percent year on year to RMB24.3 trillion, a deceleration of 1.6 percentage points from end-2020. Specifically, bank deposits decreased by 3.5 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 19.1 percent year on year. 6. Foreign exchange transactions were active In Q1, cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD2.3 trillion, an increase of 39.8 percent year on year. Cumulative turnover of RMB/foreign exchange swap transactions totaled USD4.5 trillion, an increase of 37.9 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD2.9 trillion, accounting for 64 percent of the total swap turnover. Turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD25.8 billion, falling 4.2 percent year on year. Turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD312.9 billion, rising 167.6 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 57.2 percent of the total market share.7. Gold prices went down At end-March, international gold prices closed at USD1,691.05 per ounce, representing a loss of 10.58 percent from end-2020. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB356.79 per gram, decreasing 8.52 percent from end-2020. In Q1, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 9,333.37 tons, representing a decrease of 48.3 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB3.51 trillion, a decrease of 45.2 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market In April 2021, the PBC, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), and the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) jointly released the Notice on Issuing the Green Bond Endorsed Projects Catalogue (2021 Edition). The notice aimed to further regulate the domestic green bond market and to give full play to the active role of green finance in promoting structural adjustments and transformation, accelerating the construction of an ecological civilization and facilitating sustainable economic development to realize the goals of peak carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. 2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures industry Regulation of capital market conduct was further improved. In January 2021, the CSRC released the Provisions on Strengthening Regulation of Private Equity Investment Funds, which raised prohibitive requirements, namely the “ten prohibitions,” for entities, including private equity managers. The provisions reiterated and strengthened regulation of the bottom lines in the operation of private equity funds. In January, the CSRC released Guideline No.3 for the Operation of Publicly Offered Securities Investment Funds - Index Fund Guidelines, which regularized the investment and operations of index funds and protected the legitimate rights and interests of investors. In February, the CSRC revised and released the Provisions on the Registration and Management System of Insiders with Inside Information on Listed Companies, aiming to regularize the registration and reporting of insiders with inside information on listed companies and to strengthen comprehensive prevention and control of insider trading. In February, the CSRC revised and released the Measures for the Administration of the Credit RatingBusiness in the Securities Market. The measures replaced administrative licensing with filing management, improved the rules for the securities rating business, and incorporated independence requirements. The reform of registration-based securities systems was carried forward. In February 2021, the CSRC revised and released the Measures for the Administration of Issuance and Trading of Corporate Bonds, with the registration prerequisites, registration procedures, and relevant regulatory requirements clearly specified. In March, the CSRC released the amended Measures for the Administration of Information Disclosures by Listed Companies, which improved the basic requirements for information disclosures, upgraded the periodic reporting mechanism, and lowered the costs of information disclosures. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market Regulation of the solvency of insurance companies was strengthened. In January 2021, the CBIRC revised and released the Regulations on Solvency Management of Insurance Companies. The regulations, with a risk-oriented approach, specified regulatory rules of solvency that integrated quantitative capital requirements, qualitative regulatory requirements, and market discipline mechanisms, thus making clear the three-pillar framework of solvency regulation. The short-term health insurance business was regulated. In January 2021, the CBIRC released the Notice on Regulating the Short-term Health Insurance Business, which regulated the short-term health insurance business conducted by insurance companies in such areas as insurance renewals, product sales, information disclosures, and underwriting and claims settlement. The insurance industry was further opened up. In March 2021, the CBIRC released the Implementation Rules of the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on Foreign-funded Insurance Companies, and removed the clauses concerning foreign ownership limits on joint-venture life insurance companies to maintain consistency among the relevant institutional systems. Meanwhile, the detailed rules further elaborated on the entry criteria for foreign insurance group companies and foreign financial institutions to invest in foreign-funded insurance companies. Supplementary improvements were made to clarify the requirements for market access and for changes of shareholders in foreign-funded insurance companies, relevant managementsystems for domestic insurance group companies, security reviews of foreign investment, etc. 4. Promoting the opening-up of the bond market The semi-annual review by FTSE Russell was facilitated and conducted successfully. FTSE Russell announced that it would, starting from October 29, 2021, add Chinese government bonds to its World Government Bond Index (WGBI) in a time span of 36 months. So far, all three global major bond index providers have included Chinese bonds in their major indexes. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments The global economy has gradually recovered, and vaccinations have accelerated. Markets tend to hold optimistic expectations about future economic prospects, with rising inflation expectations. Meanwhile, the imbalance in the process of economic recovery became prominent, as evidenced by enlarging divergences among different countries and regions, industries and enterprises, employment groups, as well as financial and real sectors, while the recent COVID-19 resurgence in multiple countries further increased uncertainties about an economic recovery. In the future, attention should be paid continuously to possible adjustments or shifts in the monetary policies of the major advanced economies and their spillover effects. 1. Performance in the economic and financial markets of the major economies The speed of the vaccination process has accelerated, but the COVID-19 pandemic has reoccurred since late March. By the end of April, more than 1 billion vaccine doses had been administered worldwide. However, progress was uneven among regions amid mutations of the virus and relaxation of pandemic containment measures in some areas; the global pandemic has resurged, with the number of single-day newly confirmed cases returning to over 800,000 at the end of April. Multiple countries in Europe have tightened their pandemic containment measures, among which France, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and other countries have restarted nationwideExpectations about global economic growth have improved significantly. In March, the manufacturing PMI posted 64.7, 62.5, 52.7, and 58.9 in the US, the euro area, Japan, and the UK, respectively, all reaching new highs since the outbreak of the pandemic. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) posted their global economic growth forecasts for 2021 at 6.0 and 5.6 percent in April and March respectively, 0.5 and 1.4 percentage points higher than their previous forecasts. Recovery of the labor market was relatively slow. The US unemployment rate registered 6.0 percent in March, and the number of jobs was reduced by 7.5 million from the pre-pandemic level. The labor participation rate was 61.5 percent, lower than the pre-pandemic rate of 63.3 percent at the end of 2019. The unemployment rates in the euro area in March and the UK in February was 8.1 and 4.9 percent, respectively, which were still relatively high. Signs of re-inflation occurred in the major economies. In March, the year-on-year (y-o-y) growth rate of the CPI increased to 2.6 percent in the US. In Q1, the HICP in the euro area ended its negative y-o-y growth that had lasted for 5 consecutive months in the second half of last year, and it posted a y-o-y growth rate of 1.3 percent in March. The y-o-y decrease in the CPI in Japan narrowed significantly from that at the end of last year. Inflation pressures increased in some emerging market economies, as the y-o-y growth rate of the IPCA of Brazil and the CPI of Russia moved higher in March, to 6.1 and 5.8 percent respectively, increasing by 2.8 and 3.3 percentage points compared to the same period of last year.Affected by factors such as expectations of rising economic growth and inflation as well as adjustments of market expectations, volatility in financial markets increased. Commodity prices surged with the futures prices of Brent crude oil, and tin, copper, and aluminum in the London Metal Exchange (LME) increased by 24.3, 24.0, 13.6, and 11.7 percent in Q1, respectively. Treasury yields went up remarkably in the advanced economies, with the 10-year treasury yields increasing from 0.93 and -0.57 percent at the beginning of the year to 1.74 and -0.27 percent at the end of March in the US and Germany, respectively. The stock markets in the major economies have generally increased with greater volatility.Box 3 Analysis of the Higher US Treasury Yields This year has seen a rapid rally of US Treasury yields. On January 6, the 10-year Treasury yield rose above 1 percent for the first time since March 2020, and then reached 1.74 percent on March 31, up 120 bps from the record low of 0.51 percent last year and 83 bps from year-end. The rise in Treasury yields is attributed to both inflation expectations and higher real rates. This year, the real rate as measured by the 10-year US Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) has increased 46 bps to -0.63 percent at end-March, while the spread between the 10-year Treasury yield and the real rate has increased 37 bps, with the latter usually reflecting inflation expectations. Strengthened fiscal support and improved expectations of an economic recovery have both contributed to higher inflation expectations and real rates. With continued vaccination progress, the global economy is generally making a steady recovery. In the World Economic Outlook published in April, the IMF raised its global growth forecast for 2021 from 5.5 percent in January to 6 percent, and revised its growth forecast for the US from 5.1 percent to 6.4 percent.As of now, there will continue to be a high issuance of US Treasuries in 2021. From a supply-demand perspective, holding all else constant, the gap between supply anddemand of US Treasuries may be bridged by higher yields. On the supply side, in the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031, the Congressional Budget Office projected a deficit of USD2.3 trillion for the 2021 fiscal year, which would be magnified by the USD1.9 trillion fiscal stimulus package; meanwhile, in its first quarter refund announcement, the US Treasury expected the cash balance to drop about USD1.2 trillion to USD0.5 trillion at end-June. In these three respects, institutions have projected that new financing needs may exceed USD2.5 trillion in 2021, and they expect continued high issuance of US Treasuries. On the demand side, if the Federal Reserve continues its monthly purchases of USD80 billion of Treasuries in 2021, it can absorb about USD1 trillion Treasuries, leaving more than USD1.5 trillion to other market investors. Recent years have seen a drop in the proportion of foreign-held Treasuries, from 34.4 percent at the beginning of 2015 to around 25 percent at end-2020. Therefore, there will continue to be a large amount of Treasuries for US domestic investors other than the Fed. The subsequent movement of Treasury yields depends on the economic performance, the inflation level, and the Federal Reserve’s response. In August 2020, the Federal Reserve introduced a new policy framework featuring average inflation targeting. How it is implemented is left for further observation. Fed Chair Jerome Powell expressed in an interview that when the economy is near a full recovery, the Fed will pull back its policy support during emergency times “very gradually” and “with great transparency”; and when the Fed makes further substantial progress toward its goals, it will gradually roll back the amount of asset purchases. In the future, if fiscal support is strengthened and a strong economic recovery leads to an excessively rapid rise in inflation expectations, they may trigger actions by the Fed that will affect the trend in U.S. bond yields. The impact of higher Treasury yields will be transmitted through several channels: first, through asset prices. They will drive up risk-free rates and trigger global asset price adjustments and bring about repricing risks. Second, through capital flows. They may reverse the direction of cross-border capital flows, causing funds to flow back to the US and to increase the risks of capital outflows in the emerging markets. Emerging economies with weak fundamentals may face repayment and refinancing risks. Third, through exchange rates. Higher Treasury yields may boost the dollar and place downward pressures on the currencies in some emerging economies, thereby intensifying debt risks. China has become the second largest economy, with resilience and sufficient policy space as well as sound economic performance. Bracing for the impact of COVID-19,China was the only major economy with positive growth in 2020 and one of the few major economies conducting a normal monetary policy, thus presenting unique performance. Meanwhile, as the market-oriented exchange rate reform has further deepened, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible and has fulfilled its role as an automatic stabilizer for macroeconomic management and for the balance of payments. Since the beginning of 2021, the Chinese financial market has been stable, with the RMB exchange rate floating in both directions and cross-border capital flows generally in equilibrium. Overall, higher U.S. Treasury yields and future policy adjustments by the Fed will have a limited and controllable impact on China. The key to the next step is to focus on fulfilling the PBC’s mandates, prioritize stability in monetary policies, remain proactive, and value the normal policy space. Meanwhile, the PBC will pay close attention to changes in global economic and financial conditions, enhance macro-prudential management of cross-border capital flows, strengthen flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and carry out international macro policy coordination based on domestic conditions. 2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major advanced economies have generally reiterated their stance of maintaining their loose monetary policies to support a more comprehensive economic recovery. In Q1, both the US Fed and the European Central Bank (ECB) kept their policy rates and scale of asset purchases unchanged, and the minutes of the March FOMC meeting of the US Fed illustrate that the Fed will maintain its accommodative stance until the statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability are reached. The Bank of Japan (BOJ) maintained its JPY12 trillion upper limit of exchange traded funds (ETFs) purchases and widened its target range for yield curve control, allowing the 10-year treasury yield to move up and down by 0.25 percent around zero. Monetary policies in the emerging market economies showed signs of divergence. Although most maintained accommodative stances, some economies took early actions to respond to the pressures of inflation, exchange rate depreciations, and capital outflows, and marginally tightened their monetary policies. In Q1, the central banks of Indonesia and Mexico lowered interest rates by 25 bps, with the policy rates of the central banks of India, South Africa, Malaysia, and the Philippines remaining unchanged, while the central banks of Turkey, Brazil, Ukraine, and Russia increased their policy rates by 200, 75, 50, and 25 bps, respectively.3. Issues and trends that merit attention First, the global economic recovery still faces high uncertainties, with increasing divergences and imbalances. For some time in the future, the key determinant of a global economic recovery will still be containment of COVID-19. Currently, vaccination progress and the outcomes of pandemic prevention and control have been rather divergent across countries amid diversified macroeconomics policies and market recovery capacities, thus resulting in significantly uneven economic development. Some areas are experiencing a marked rebound of new cases and a tightening of their lock-down measures, and their economic recovery processes are facing great challenges. Second, the influence of the ultra-loose macro policies by the major economies and the risks brought about by monetary policy shifts require close attention. At the end of Q1 2021, the balance sheets of the US Fed, the ECB, and the BOJ expanded by 85 percent, 60 percent, and 25 percent, respectively, compared to those at the end of 2019. The expansions mainly resulted from purchases of government bonds, with over half of the newly issued US treasury bonds purchased by the Fed in 2020. The fiscal and monetary policies of the advanced economies are closely integrated, and their scale is huge, pushing global asset prices to rise, to be separated from the real economy, and causing financial risks continue to increase. Whether these risks will be transferred in the future through sovereign debt risks, high inflation, exchange-rate and interest-rate fluctuations, or valuation adjustments in stock and bond markets needs to be closely watched. In Q1, the rise in long-end interest rates in the US triggered higher volatility in global financial markets and brought about greater pressures of capital outflows and an exchange rate depreciation in some emerging market economies with fragile economic fundamentals. The Bank of Canada (BOC) reduced the scale of asset purchases in April. If the major advanced economies release clear signals of monetary policy shifts in the future, the potential spillover effects will further magnify the fluctuations in global cross-border capital flows. Third, the level of global inflation may continue to trend up. The global economic recovery has driven up the demand for commodities and raw materials; amid the ultra-loose liquidity environment the prices of international commodities, such as iron ore, copper, crude oil, and soybeans, have increased rapidly. Given the low base effect from last year, the y-o-y readings of the global inflation indices may generally trend up for some time in the future, leading to further increases in inflation expectations.II. Macroeconomic developments in China In Q1 2021, achievements to coordinate pandemic containment and economic and social development in all regions and departments across the country were consolidated and expanded. China’s economy continued to recover steadily, and the development momentum became stronger. The national economy got off to a good start as production continued to resume its growth, all three demands, i.e., consumption, investment, and export, rebounded steadily, consumption played a greater role in economic growth, and employment and consumer prices were stable. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in Q1 2021 grew by 18.3 percent year on year and increased by 10.3 percent compared to the same period of 2019. The average growth rate of GDP in the past two years was 5 percent and the CPI was basically flat compared with the previous year. 1. Consumption gradually improved, investments steadily rebounded, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth. Residents’ income rebounded steadily, and people’s willingness to consume improved. In Q1, the country’s per capita disposable income increased by 13.7 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 13.7 percent in real terms, and its average growth rate in the past two years was 4.5 percent. The structure of income distribution improved, and the income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q1, 22.3 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” up 0.3 percentage point from the same period of 2020. In Q1, total retail sales of consumer goods grew by 33.9 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during the past two years was 4.2 percent. Consumption by urban residents and online retail sales continued to grow rapidly. Final consumption expenditures contributed to 63.4 percent of economic growth, which contributed to the growth of GDP by 11.6 percentage points and a year-on-year increase of 15.9 percentage points. Investments rebounded steadily, and investments in the high-tech industry and social areas grew rapidly. In Q1, total fixed-asset investments increased by 25.6 percent year on year, and the average growth rate in the past two years registered 2.9 percent. In terms of sectors, the year-on-year growth of investments in social areas registered 31.7 percent, with an average growth rate of 9.6 percent in the past two years.Investments in real estate development and infrastructure increased by 25.6 percent and 29.7 percent respectively, and the average growth rate in the past two years registered 7.6 percent and 2.3 percent, respectively. Investments in the manufacturing sector increased by 29.8 percent and the average growth rate was slightly negative in the past two years. The investment structure was further optimized. Investments in the high-tech industry grew by 37.3 percent year on year, 11.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Specifically, investments in the high-tech manufacturing sector and the high-tech services sector grew by 41.6 percent and 28.6 percent year on year, respectively. Export momentum was robust, and the trade structure was more optimized. In Q1, imports and exports of goods denominated in RMB grew by 29.2 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 38.7 percent year on year, while imports grew by 19.3 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods posting RMB759.3 billion, an increase of RMB663.3 billion year on year. The trade structure continued to improve. The share of imports and exports under general trade reached 61.2 percent, up 1.3 percentage points year on year. Imports and exports by private enterprises accounted for 46.7 percent of total foreign trade, up 4.4 percentage points year on year. Exports of machinery and electronics increased by 43 percent year on year, accounting for 60.4 percent of total exports. Exports of high-tech products increased by 38.9 percent year on year, accounting for 29.9 percent of total exports. China’s trade partners became more diversified. China’s trade with countries along the Belt and Road and with RCEP trade partners grew by 21.4 percent and 22.9 percent, respectively. The expectations and confidence of foreign direct investment (FDI) were stable with promising signs, and FDI became concentrated in the high-tech industry. In Q1, actually utilized FDI increased by 39.9 percent year on year to RMB302.5 billion, which was 24.8 percent higher than that in the same period of 2019. Actual utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 32.1 percent year on year, among which FDI in the high-tech service industry grew by 43.9 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production remained stable, industrial production rebounded steadily, and growth of the service industry recovered In 2020, the value-added of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 8.1 percent, 24.4 percent, and 15.6 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 4.6 percent, 37.2 percent, and 58.3 percent of GDP. The average growth rate of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries was 2.3 percent, 6.0 percent, and 4.7 percentrespectively in the past two years. Agricultural production was generally stable and hog production witnessed a significant recovery. Climate conditions in the main agricultural areas of China were generally favorable, as spring ploughing and sowing went smoothly, contributing to slightly better growth of winter wheat than in previous years. In Q1, the value-added of agriculture grew by 3.3 percent year on year, and the average growth rate was 3.4 percent during the past two years. Hogs in stock increased by 29.5 percent year on year and hogs available for slaughter increased by 30.6 percent year on year. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 21.4 percent year on year, among which the output of pork increased by 31.9 percent year on year. Industrial production grew steadily, and business profits improved significantly. In Q1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 24.5 percent year on year and the average growth rate in the last two years registered 6.8 percent. The value-added of IEDS in Q1 increased by a seasonally adjusted 2.01 percent quarter on quarter, which was slightly higher than that in Q4 2020. Specifically, the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector increased by 31.2 percent and 39.9 percent respectively year on year, with the average growth rate in these two sectors posting 12.3 percent and 9.7 percent in the past two years respectively, significantly higher than the rates in other sectors. In Q1, total profits of the IEDS increased 1.37 times year on year and the average growth rate registered 22.6 percent during the past two years. According to the Entrepreneur Survey Report conducted in Q1 by the PBC, the Business Climate Index posted 56.3 percent, up 0.5 percentage points from Q4 2020 and 26 percentage points from the same period of 2020. Growth in the service industry recovered, and market expectations improved. In Q1, the value-added of the service industry grew by 15.6 percent year on year, accounting for 58.3 percent of GDP, an acceleration of 3.8 percentage points from 2020, and the average growth rate was 4.7 percent during the past two years. In March, the Index of Service Production (ISP) increased by 25.3 percent year on year, and the average growth rate registered 6.8 percent during the past two years. The Business Activities Index for the railway sector, aviation sector, satellite transmission service of the telecommunication/broadcasting/television sector, internet software and information IT services sector, and the financial sector exceeded 60 percent, remaining in an expansion area. The Business Activities Index for accommodations, housing rentals，business services, and residents’ services, once affected notably by the pandemic in certain regions at the beginning of 2021, rebounded to a prosperous range and operations in these sectors improved significantly. The Expected Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 62.9 percent, remaining above 60 percent for two consecutive months. 3. Consumer prices were generally stable, and the growth of producer prices expanded Consumer prices were generally stable. In Q1, both the CPI and the core CPI (food and energy excluded) were basically flat compared with the previous year. Due to the decline in the base figures from the initial high levels in the previous year, the CPI in January and February decreased by 0.3 percent and 0.2 percent year on year, respectively and rose by 0.4 percent year on year in March. As the capacity for hog production gradually recovered, pork prices declined for six consecutive months and dropped by 12.5 percent year on year in Q1, driving down food prices by 0.2 percentage point. Non-food prices decreased by 0.1 percent year on year. The growth of producer prices expanded. In Q1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 2.1 percent year on year, an acceleration of 3.5 percentage points compared with Q4 2020. The growth rate of PPI in January, February, and March registered 0.3 percent, 1.7 percent, and 4.4 percent, respectively. Due to the steady recovery of domestic needs, the growth of prices of bulk commodities, such as oil, and the relatively low base figures in the previous year, the growth of PPI expanded year on year. Production materials that are highly connected to price trends in bulk commodities, such as oil, steel, and nonferrous metals, contributed to the acceleration of PPI by 2.13 percentage points. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by 2.8 percent year on year, accelerating by 4.2 percentage points from Q4 2020. The Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI), monitored by the PBC, increased by 3.2 percent year on year, accelerating by 4.4 percentage points compared with that in 2020. Box 4 How to View the Recent Price Movements Both at Home and Abroad The global commodity price and inflation indexes of the major economies have recently shown an upward trend. At end-April 2021, the price indexes of WTI crudeoil futures, LME copper futures, and CRB spot commodities registered year-on-year growth of 187 percent, 89 percent, and 51 percent, respectively. In March, the CPI in the US and the HICP in the euro area grew by 2.6 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively, year on year, accelerating by 2.5 percentage points and 1.6 percentage points from the low point in 2020. These figures are higher or at par with the pre-pandemic level in December 2019, and the relevant indexes of inflationary expectations have gone upward to varying degrees. In addition, in March the Consumer Price Index in Russia and Brazil grew over 5 percent and 6 percent year on year, respectively. The major factors pushing up commodity prices and inflation are as follows. First, the governments of the major economies have introduced large-scale stimulus packages, and it is widely expected that overall demand will tend to be exuberant. Second, as there has been an obvious COVID-19 resurgence overseas and the supply side is still facing constraints, the recovery of demand in global economies will outpace that of supply in the post-pandemic era. Third, central banks in the major economies have adopted ultra-loose monetary policies, and global liquidity continues to remain extremely ample. At present, as the above-mentioned three factors cannot be eliminated in the short run, global inflation is likely to continue its moderate upward trend for some time. As far as China is concerned, the influence of the imported inflation from overseas is mainly reflected in the price rise of industrial products. Combined with the low base in 2020, this is likely to push up the growth of PPI in China in Q2 and Q3 2021. China is the major importer of commodities. In terms of import volume and reliance, the commodities influencing PPI are mainly crude oil, iron ore, and copper. In particular, crude oil is the biggest factor behind PPI movements, as its down-stream industrial chain is fairly long, and it has an impact on the price of chemical products. The temporary rise in the PPI during this year should be viewed historically and objectively. First, the PPI has, to some extent, registered a “high reading” upon a “low base.” In 2020, due to the impact of the pandemic and the considerable drop in commodity prices, PPI growth in China was below -2 percent for seven consecutive months and it hit a low of -3.7 percent in April 2020. Therefore, PPI movements in 2021 will mainly be affected by the “mirroring effect” of the low base (see Figure 6). On average, annual PPI growth from 2020 to 2021 will still remain within a reasonable range. Second, historically the PPI has witnessed relatively large fluctuations, and it is not rare that the PPI temporarily underwent a considerable drop or a surge within a few months. During the past twenty years, the averageyear-on-year PPI growth posted about 1.2 percent on a monthly basis, with the standard deviation reaching 4.2 percentage points. Large swings in the PPI are common around the globe. Third, the rise in commodity prices reflects a temporary “mismatch” between supply and demand. If the pandemic is effectively contained and capacity for production and supply in the emerging economies returns to normal, the rise in prices for the means of production is likely to slow down. In general, the PPI is likely to stabilize as the base effect subsides and global production and supply recovers.In terms of its impact on China’s consumer price index, during recent years the transmission relationship between PPI and CPI in China has been significantly weakened and the fluctuations in international bulk commodity prices have had a correspondingly low impact on China’s trends. In addition, hog supply at home has basically stabilized and pork prices are overall tending to go down. China has witnessed consecutive bumper harvests of grain production for several years and its self-sufficiency ratio of agricultural products is fairly high. Therefore, according to preliminary estimates, CPI growth in 2021 will be moderate and will remain within a reasonable range as the overall impact of external factors will be controllable. In fact, considering that China is one of the largest economies, a rise in global commodity prices is not likely to trigger a notable imported inflation, if it does not overlap with rising domestic demand..According to the comprehensive analysis, although the global commodity price hike is likely to push up China’s PPI at the current stage, the risk of imported inflation is overall controllable. In response to the pandemic, China has maintained a normal monetary policy and has refrained from adopting a deluge of strong stimulus policies in 2020. Given the steady and sound economic development and the basic equilibrium in aggregate supply and demand, there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. Undoubtedly, efforts should be made to closely watch the differentiated impact of the rise of commodity prices on different sectors and businesses. Comprehensive measures should be implemented to ensure supply and to stabilize prices, to timely and effectively manage expectations, and to prevent the price fluctuations from getting out of control. 4. The growth of fiscal revenue and expenditures recovered, and, on the whole, employment was stable The growth of fiscal revenue recovered. In Q1 2021, revenue in the national general public budget increased by 24.2 percent year on year to RMB5.7115 trillion, accelerating by 38.5 percentage points compared with Q1 2020. Central and local fiscal revenue grew by 27.2 percent and 21.7 percent year on year, respectively. Specifically, tax revenue increased by 24.8 percent year on year, with the domestic value-added tax and the domestic consumption tax growing by 23.9 percent and 18.5 percent year on year, respectively, while non-tax revenue increased by 20.7 percent year on year. Fiscal expenditures were on the whole stable. In Q1 2021, expenditures in the national general budget saw an increase of 6.2 percent year on year to RMB5.8703 trillion, accounting for 23.5 percent of annual expenditures in the budget. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures on education and science and technology grew by 13.8 percent and 16.3 percent, respectively, expenditures on infrastructure slowed down, while expenditures on agriculture, forestry, and water resource projects dropped by 5.5 percent, and expenditures on transportation dropped by 7.8 percent year on year. The surveyed urban unemployment rate dropped, and the employment situation was generally stable. In Q1 2021, 2.97 million people were newly employed, up 680,000 year on year. As pandemic containment and collective recruitment in the spring were advanced in an orderly manner, the surveyed urban unemployment rate declined on both on a year-on-year and a month-on-month basis. In March, the surveyed urbanunemployment rate was 5.3 percent, down 0.2 percentage points month on month and down 0.6 percentage points year on year. Specifically, the surveyed unemployment rate of populations between the ages of 25 and 29 was 4.8 percent, 0.5 percentage point lower than the surveyed urban unemployment rate. 5. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. In Q1 2021, China’s current account surplus registered USD75.1 billion. Specifically, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD118.7 billion, whereas trade in services recorded a deficit of USD22.3 billion. The capital and financial account deficit was USD75.1 billion. At end-2020, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.4008 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt balance was USD1.3164 trillion, accounting for 55 percent of the total external debt balance. At end-March 2021, foreign exchange reserves posted USD3.17 trillion, down 1.5 percent, or USD46.5 billion from end-2020. 6. Analysis by sector 6.1 The real estate sector In Q1 2021, housing prices remained generally stable in China. Due to the low base figure in the previous year, housing sales and investments in real estate development grew remarkably year on year. In March, among the 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 4.4 percent and 3.3 percent year on year respectively, accelerating by 0.7 percentage point and 1.2 percentage points from end-2020. In Q1, total floor area of sold units increased by 63.8 percent year on year, registering average growth of 9.9 percent during the past two years. Housing sales increased by 88.5 percent year on year, registering average growth of 19.1 percent during the past two years. In Q1, investments in real estate development grew by 25.6 percent year on year, registering average growth of 7.6 percent during the past two years. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 28.8 percent year on year, registering average growth of 9.3 percent during the past two years and accounting for 74.8 percent of total investments in real estate development.Growth of real estate loans on the whole remained stable. At end-March, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 10.9 percent year on year to RMB50.0 trillion, a deceleration of 0.6 percentage point from end-2020. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 14.5 percent year on year to RMB35.7 trillion, a deceleration of 0.1 percentage point from end-2020. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 5.8 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion, a deceleration of 2.4 percentage points from end-2020. 6.2 The electricity sector was is transitioning to achieve the targets of peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality In 2020, having overcome the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and the serious domestic and international situations, the electricity sector managed to provide reliable electricity guarantees for pandemic containment and resumption of work and production. Supply and demand for electricity was on the whole balanced, except for short supplies at peak times in some regions. Since the beginning of 2021, electricity production rebounded rapidly, and demand for electricity was strong, mainly due to cold spells and that people were staying put for the Spring Festival. In Q1 2021, electricity generated by power plants above a designated size grew by 19 percent year on year to 1.9051 trillion kWh, registering average growth of 5.3 percent over the past two years. Total electricity consumption grew by 21.2 percent year on year. Specifically, electricity consumed by the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 26.4 percent, 24.1 percent, and 28.2 percent year on year respectively, and electricity consumed by residents in urban and rural areas grew by 4.7 percent year onyear. In September 2020, General Secretary Xi Jinping delivered a speech at the general debate of the 75th Session of the United Nations General Assembly, announcing that China will scale up its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions and achieve a carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060. In recent years, the electricity sector has witnessed remarkable achievements in the transition to low carbon and green development. The structure for electricity generation has been continuously improved, and a relatively complete industrial system of renewable energy technologies has been put into place. To be specific, the hydropower sector boasts independent design and manufacturing capability of the largest million kW-level hydraulic turbine in the world; its technology for low-speed wind power ranks in the forefront of the world; the photovoltaic industry takes the lead in the world with its industrial competitiveness continuously on the rise. At end-2020, the installed capacity of China’s renewable energy totaled 930 million kW, accounting for 42.4 percent of Gross Installed Capacity (GIC), up 14.6 percentage points from end-2012. The share of installed capacity of coal-fired power in GIC dropped to 49.1 percent, and clean power accounted for over 70 percent of newly installed capacities in 2020. Grid-connected wind and solar power generation grew rapidly by 15.1 percent and 16.6 percent year on year to 466.5 billion and 261.1 billion kWh respectively in 2020. It should also be noted that most of China’s power is thermal power. Although the share of installed capacity of coal-fired power in GIC has been cut to below 50 percent, the share of coal-fired power generation in total power generation is as high as about 65 percent. Therefore, there is still a long way to go to shift the power generating structure. In the meantime, the electricity sector faces technological bottlenecks such as the power generation and conservation of renewable energies as well as the flexibility of grid system, and intermittent and fluctuating wind power and photovoltaic consumption problems are becoming more prominent. To meet the target of achieving carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060, while ensuring power safety and supply, it is necessary to construct a new type of electricity system mainly composed of new energies. An institutional mechanism and policy system that are conducive to the joint development and utilization of renewable energy by the whole society should be improved. In terms of power production, China should take action to upgrade energy conservation and emission cuts of coal-fired power so as to achieve peak thermal power generation as soon as possible. Action should be taken to optimize the layout of new energy development, to encourage the local development and utilization of newenergy, to gradually realize clean replacement of photovoltaic, wind power, hydropower, etc., and to gradually form a key technology system of new power systems with China’s independent intellectual property rights. In terms of power transmission, China should accelerate the smart transformation of grid infrastructure and the construction of smart microgrids; build a long-term mechanism for new energy consumption, strengthen the integration of “source, grid, load, and storage,” and enhance the ability to address idle capacities and conservation of clean energies. At the same time, China should accelerate the construction of a unified, open, competitive, and orderly power market system and a national carbon emission trading system, so as to produce effective price signals and to give full play to the decisive role of the market in the distribution of power resources. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I．Outlook for the Chinese economy Since the beginning of 2021, the Chinese economy continued recovering, reinforcing and improving steadily. In Q1, GDP saw year-on-year growth of 18.3 percent, with the growth rate averaging 5.0 percent during the past two years. The economy is off to a good start, and new achievements have been made in high-quality development. The 14th Five-Year Plan period (2021–25) will be the first five years as China embarks on a new journey to build a modern socialist country in all respects. Therefore, China’s development is still at an important phase of strategic opportunities, and the fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run remain unchanged. The growth momentum of the Chinese economy has been continuously enhanced, and there have been more positive factors in economic performance. In Q1, industrial production steadily picked up, and exports driven by rising external demand maintained fairly fast growth. Investment and consumption sustained the trend of a steady recovery, employment and the people’s well-being were secured, and market expectations were generally stable. The quality and efficiency of the financial sector in serving the real economy improved continuously, and the pace of credit supply by financial institutions was appropriate. The macro leverage ratio in Q1 was 276.8 percent, decreasing further by 2.6 percentage points after a drop of 1.6 percentage points in Q4 2020. As a result, the potential momentum to serve high-qualitydevelopment has been strengthened. Overall financial risks have tended to moderate, and the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur has been firmly defended. The RMB exchange rate has been kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and foreign exchange reserves have remained above USD3 trillion. The economy has strengthened its capacity to address external shocks. It should also be noted that as the external environment is still complex and serious, the Chinese economic recovery is imbalanced and its foundation is not solid; social and economic development still faces numerous risks and challenges. The COVID-19 pandemic is still raging around the globe with many regions witnessing a resurgence of infections recently. The global economic recovery is imbalanced and unstable, which has become increasingly apparent, and the spillover effect of the overseas accommodative monetary policies continues to be felt. Meanwhile, the rising inflation expectations in the major economies and the increasing yields of their government bonds have caused some emerging economies to face mounting pressures of currency depreciation and capital outflow as well as rising risks in debt repayments and refinancing. Domestically, the foundation for economic recovery is not yet solid as resident consumption is still constrained, investment growth lacks momentum, micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and self-employed businesses are facing many difficulties, and pressures remain concerning employment. As the contradiction between fiscal revenue and fiscal expenditures is prominent in some regions, there are still potential risks with respect to regional finance. In addition, we must not overlook medium and long-term challenges, such as an insufficient capacity for technological innovations, the extremely urgent task of green transformation and the accelerating aging of the population. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance awareness of both opportunities and risks. The PBC will focus on fulfilling its responsibilities by properly handling the relationship between reforms and macro management, short-term and long-term considerations, as well as internal and external equilibria in a bid to achieve high-quality development. Consumer prices overall are stable, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. In Q1 2021, the COVID-19 resurgence in some regions during the winter and the spring to some extent affected the recovery of consumption in the service industry. Adding the disruption of short-term factors such as the high base and the late arrival of the Spring Festival, CPI growth remained around zero and turned from negative to positive in March, posting 0.4 percent and 0.9 percent in March and in April, respectively. In the near future, the CPI will move stably and stay within areasonable range. Meanwhile, the steady recovery of domestic demand and the price hikes in commodities such as crude oil have led to rising prices of industrial products and an acceleration of year-on-year PPI growth. Adding the low-base effect, the PPI will witness a rise in 2021. When the base effect subsides and supply gradually recovers, the PPI is likely to stabilize. In the medium and long term, the Chinese economy is expected to witness stable growth. Given that aggregate supply and demand are basically in equilibrium, the monetary policy remains sound, and monetary conditions are reasonable and appropriate, there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference and will put into practice the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will adhere to the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, view things from the perspective of the new development stage, apply the new development philosophy, and foster a new development paradigm. Giving top priority to ensuring stability, the PBC will focus on what is important, defend the bottom line, and live up to its responsibilities. Meanwhile, it will attach importance to cross-cycle policy design by taking into account both immediate and long-term concerns, maintaining the continuity, stability, and sustainability of macro policies, and keeping up the necessary intensity of support for the economy. Moreover, the PBC will stabilize expectations, implement macro policies in a targeted manner, and consolidate and further the success achieved in pandemic control as well as in economic and social development so as to keep the economic indicators within a reasonable range and achieve a higher level of equilibrium in the course of recovery. With these efforts, the PBC will celebrate the centenary of the CPC with outstanding achievements. The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. It will place even higher priority on serving the real economy, cherish the space for the conduct of a normal monetary policy, and properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention. At the same time, the PBC will build a modern central banking system while improving the modern monetary policy framework and the mechanism for money supply management. It will keep liquidityadequate at a reasonable level so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be basically in line with nominal economic growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. Work will be done to further bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts as well as the monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy, to build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, and to intensify support for the real economy, key fields, and weak links. The PBC will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, improve the central bank policy rate system, optimize regulation over deposit rates, and continue to unleash the potential of reform in lowering loan rates so as to further bring down loan rates in real terms. While giving play to the decisive role of market supply and demand in the formation of exchange rates and enhancing the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, it will strengthen macro-prudential management, stabilize market expectations, and guide enterprises and financial institutions to always be risk-neutral, thereby keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and consolidating the basis of the RMB’s international credit. More efforts will be put into monitoring and analysis as well as expectation management to keep prices basically stable. With the aim of firmly defending the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and will set up a long-term mechanism for forestalling and defusing financial risks so as to safeguard and build financial security. Moreover, further steps will be taken to hold all relevant parties accountable and to replenish the capital of small- and medium-sized banks based on their conditions. First, the PBC will maintain a reasonable growth in money and credit as well as in AFRE. It will improve the mechanism for money supply management, attach importance to cross-cycle policy design, and properly control the general valve of money supply so that the growth rates of money supply and AFRE will be basically in line with nominal economic growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. Closely watching the developments of economic and financial situations at home and abroad, it will enhance monitoring and analysis of liquidity supply and demand and financial markets. It will also employ a mix of monetary policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility, open market operations, central bank lending, and central bank discounts, to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to guide market rates to move around policy rates. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for sustainable replenishment of bank capital and will step up support for small- and medium-sized banks in their issuances of capital replenishment instruments, such as perpetual bonds, so that banks will be better ableto serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Measures will be taken to improve macroeconomic governance, to optimize monetary policy objectives as well as fiscal, employment, industry, investment, consumption, environmental protection, regional and other policy objectives, and to promote a reasonable division of duties and an efficient synergy. Second, the PBC will promote effective policy implementation to bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts, and the monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy. It will keep central bank lending and central bank discount policies stable, and it will continue to provide inclusive and sustainable funding support for agro-related businesses, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and private enterprises. It will keep up the intensity of financial support for MSBs and further ramp up support for self-employed traders. The structural monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy will be used to play an effective role in targeted liquidity provision, and two monetary policy instruments directly supporting the real economy will remain in place for another extended period until the end of this year. Research is being done on the launch of a central bank support instrument for carbon emissions reduction to support eligible financial institutions providing funding at preferential interest rates to projects that will significantly reduce carbon emissions. The PBC will support green and low-carbon development in line with market-oriented principles to help reach the aims of peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. It will improve the system for providing financial support for innovation and will develop fund chains for innovation chains and industrial chains. It will improve the regional financial policy system, boost financial support for major national strategies on regional development, balance regional financial support, and promote coordinated development across regions. Financial support policies will remain generally stable to consolidate and further the achievements of poverty eradication. Moreover, work will be done to step up financial support for the modernization of agriculture and rural areas, to vigorously promote unsecured micro loans for farmers, and to intensify financial support for key fields, such as food security, development of the seed industry, and development of high-quality farmland. The PBC will push further ahead with efforts to enhance the ability of commercial banks to provide financial services and will support them to increase credit supply for the agricultural sector, rural areas, farmers, MSBs, and the manufacturing sector. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices, housing prices, and expectations, and it will maintain the continuity, consistency, and stability of real estate finance policies. It will also implement rules for prudential management of real estate finance and step up financial support for the rental of housing. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will enhance the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system and continuing to deepen the loan prime rate (LPR) reform. In the meantime, it will unleash the potential of reform in lowering loan rates, optimize regulation over deposit rates, further bring down loan rates in real terms, and continue guiding the financial system to make interest concessions to the real economy. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and bring into play the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. It will guide social expectations and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Work will be done to accelerate development of the foreign exchange market, to guide enterprises and financial institutions to always be risk-neutral, and to provide services of exchange rate risk management for import and export companies with authentic needs. The PBC will steadily advance convertibility of the RMB under the capital account, improve the policy framework and the infrastructure for cross-border use of the RMB, and facilitate use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment. Fifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental institution building in the financial market to serve the real economy and to guard against market risks. Institution building will be strengthened in the bond market to enhance its abilities to serve the real economy. The PBC will see that intermediary institutions fulfil their responsibilities, and it will push for the implementation of the requirements for information disclosures regarding corporate credit bonds and improve the regulations on credit ratings. The mechanism for risk prevention and resolution of bond defaults will be improved in line with market-oriented and law-based principles, while measures will be taken to crack down on debt evasion. Moreover, the PBC will improve the institutional arrangements of relevant policies to steadily open up thebond market. Continued efforts will be made to enhance fundamental institution building in the capital market so as to better protect the interests of investors and promote the stable and healthy development of the capital market. Sixth, the PBC will push further ahead with the reform of financial institutions and will continue to improve corporate governance and optimize financial supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, more work will be done to deepen the reform of large commercial banks and to establish a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. Large banks will be guided to shift the focus of their services to the primary level and increase efficiency so as to provide better services for MSBs and private enterprises. Through improvements in monetary, regulatory, and tax rules, small- and medium-sized banks and rural credit cooperatives will be encouraged to focus on their main duties and businesses and to reassume their roles in serving local needs and their original purposes, while an effective mechanism for checks and balances in governance will be established. Measures will be taken to reform and optimize development finance and policy finance, to stress their respective positioning, and to carry out category-based management of separate accounts so that they will be better able to serve national strategies and planning and to provide financial support for key fields, weak links as well as critical stages in economic and social development. Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. It will make every effort to defuse existing risks and to contain any possible resurgence of risks. In the meantime, it will further define the respective responsibilities of all concerned parties to see that they truly perform their duties and work together to resolve risks. Efforts will be intensified to write off non-performing assets in the banking system, while the capital of small- and medium-sized banks will be replenished based on their conditions. The PBC will act quickly to shore up the weaknesses in the regulatory framework, accelerate its work to improve the modern financial regulatory system, and strengthen regulatory coordination. It will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and establish a mechanism for fiscal and financial risk resolution led by major local officials so as to hold to account those responsible for major financial risks and effectively prevent moral hazards. While the role of the deposit insurance system will be effectively brought into play, attention will be focused on early rectification. More work needs to be done to improve the mechanism for professional and market-oriented risk resolution under the deposit insurance system. The PBC willwork towards financial risk prevention that is more forward-looking, broad-sighted, and preemptive so as to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur. Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis  Starting from 2021, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with  Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, following the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary  Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work  Conference, and implementing the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of  the Government, the People's Bank of China (PBC) pursued a sound monetary policy  which is flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. Money, credit, and aggregate  financing to the real economy gained reasonable growth. Overall financing costs  remained stable, albeit with a slight decline. Financial support for the real economy,  key areas, and weak links was further strengthened. All this buttressed stable  performance of the economy with good momentum.  I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level  In Q2 2021, the PBC pursued a sound monetary policy that is flexible, targeted,  reasonable, and appropriate. It made scientific judgments about macroeconomic  conditions and implemented the concept of a cross-cycle design. By comprehensively  using multiple policy tools, such as the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) and open  market operations (OMOs), to inject liquidity, and conducting these operations in a  more forward-looking, flexible, and effective manner, the PBC maintained adequate  liquidity in the banking system at a reasonable level. In the meantime, the PBC  strengthened direct communications with market entities in many ways to stabilize  market expectations, and it steadily released policy rate signals. Market interest rates  were guided to move around the OMO rates, further strengthening the stability of  interest rates. On July 15, the PBC reduced the required reserve ratio (RRR) by 0.5  percentage points, optimizing the capital structure of financial institutions through  liquidity management. The PBC proactively took into consideration factors, such as the  peak tax period, the maturity of the MLF, and the accelerated issuance of local  government bonds, and placed an emphasis on balancing demand and supply of market  funds. Thus, the short, medium, and long-term liquidity supply was kept adequate at a  reasonable level, basically in line with market demand. At end-June, the excess reserve  ratio of financial institutions registered 1.2 percent, down 0.4 percentage points from  the corresponding period of 2020.  II. Lending by financial institutions grew reasonably, with the lending rates at  historically low levels  Credits provide solid support for the real economy. During the COVID-19 pandemic,  there was an increase in enterprises‚Äô demand for additional financing, which was fully  satisfied by financial institutions. This pushed up the base of financial data in H1 2020.  Despite a high base, financial data still witnessed fairly large year-on-year growth in  H1 2021, with the normal financing demands of enterprises satisfied and support for  the real economy steady. At end-June, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions  in domestic and foreign currencies grew 11.9 percent year on year to RMB191.6 trillion,  increasing RMB13.2 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and RMB500.2 billion more  than the increase during the corresponding period of 2020, respectively. Outstanding  RMB-denominated loans grew 12.3 percent year on year to RMB185.5 trillion, up  RMB12.8 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an increase that was RMB667.7  billion larger than that during the corresponding period of 2020.  With the credit structure continuously being improved, key areas and weak links, such as the manufacturing sector and micro and small businesses (MSBs), received targeted  support. At end-June, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities  grew by RMB6.6 trillion from the beginning of the year, a year-on-year acceleration of  RMB1.8 trillion. Medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector increased  by 41.6 percent, marking the fourth consecutive month of growth over 40 percent. In  particular, the high-tech manufacturing sector witnessed a year-on-year increase of 46.3  percent. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 31 percent year on year to  RMB17.7 trillion, 18.7 percentage points higher than that of total loans during the same  period. These loans supported 38.3 million MSBs, rising 29.2 percent year on year. The weighted average interest rates on loans hit a record low. In 2021, the PBC  continued to release the potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, guided actual  lending rates to go down amidst stability, and encouraged the financial sector to cut  profits in favor of the real economy. In the meantime, the PBC optimized regulation  over deposit rates and adjusted the self-disciplinary ceiling for deposit rates, leading to  a decline in the borrowing costs of banks. In June, the one-year LPR and the over-five year LPR stood at 3.85 percent and 4.65 percent, respectively, on par with those in  December 2020. The weighted average lending rate recorded 4.93 percent in June,  sinking to a new low. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans  registered 5.20 percent, down 0.06 percentage point year on year, hitting a record low.  The weighted average corporate lending rate fell by 0.06 percentage point year on year  to 4.58 percent, reaching historically low levels. This indicates that financial support  for the real economy continues to yield positive results.  In June, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered  67.67 percent, 8.07 percent, and 24.25 percent, respectively.  Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans declined slightly. In June, the  weighted average interest rates on demand and large-value USD-denominated deposits  with maturities within 3 months registered 0.10 percent and 0.43 percent, down 0.06  and 0.16 percentage point from December 2020, respectively. The weighted average  interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within 3 months and with  maturities between 3 months (including 3 months) and 6 months registered 1.15 percent  and 0.99 percent, down 0.07 percentage points and 0.37 percentage points from  December 2020, respectively.  Deposits grew steadily. At end-June, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign  currencies in all financial institutions increased 9.5 percent year on year to RMB233.2  trillion, up RMB14.8 trillion from the beginning of 2021 and an acceleration of  RMB50.1 billion. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 9.2 percent year on year to  RMB226.7 trillion, an increase of RMB14 trillion from the beginning of the year and a  deceleration of RMB506.4 billion. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at  USD1 trillion, an increase of USD129.7 billion from the beginning of 2021 and an  acceleration of USD109.1 billion. This was against the backdrop of China leading the  global economic recovery and a widened trade surplus. III. Broad money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy displayed  appropriate growth  Outstanding M2 recorded RMB231.8 trillion at end-June, increasing 8.6 percent year  on year, and thus maintaining strong support for the real economy. Outstanding M1 and  M0 registered RMB63.7 trillion and RMB8.4 trillion, respectively, increasing 5.5  percent and 6.2 percent year on year. H1 2021 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB3.2  billion, which is RMB223.8 billion less than that in the same period of the previous  year.  According to preliminary statistics, outstanding aggregate financing to the real  economy (AFRE) at end-June reached over RMB300 trillion, recording RMB301.56  trillion specifically. Year-on-year growth registered 11 percent, decelerating 2.3  percentage points compared to the growth recorded at end-2020. The AFRE increment  in H1 2021 totaled RMB17.74 trillion, dropping RMB3.13 trillion year on year. It  shows the following characteristics: first, RMB-denominated loans recorded a larger  year-on-year increase. Second, trust loans and undiscounted bankers‚Äô acceptances  recorded a significantly larger year-on-year drop. Third, corporate bonds showed a  year-on-year drop in growth, while domestic equity financing of non-financial  companies exhibited a year-on-year increase. Fourth, government bonds recorded a  significantly smaller year-on-year increase. Fifth, asset-backed securities of depository  institutions showed a larger year-on-year increase. Box 1 A Proper Understanding of Money and Inflation  There are views that the relationship between money and inflation is no longer  functional because in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008, the prolonged over issuance of money in the major advanced economies did not lead to high inflation.  Consequently, central bank purchasing of assets as a way to expand money supply has  become the elixir that can spur the economy without causing high inflation. In this  respect, it is necessary to take a proper view of the difference between the quantitative  easing (QE) policies unveiled following the 2008 global financial crisis and those  policies adopted in response to the 2020 pandemic, and correctly understand the  relationship between money and inflation.  First, the QE policy that focuses on increasing base money, under which real  money growth is limited. For nearly a decade following the 2008 global financial crisis,  various factors had contributed to low inflation in the major advanced economies, such  as globalization and technological development on the supply side, the aging population,  debt overdrafts, and wealth polarization on the demand side. From a monetary  perspective, although central banks in the US, Europe, and Japan adopted QE policies  and significantly expanded their balance sheets from end-Q3 2008 to end-2017 to  increase base money, average annual growth of money supply (broad money) in these  regions were only 6.5 percent, 2.8 percent, and 2.7 percent, respectively, which roughly  matched their average nominal GDP growth of 3.1 percent, 1.8 percent, and 0.4 percent  during the same period. This is the fundamental reason that the advanced economies  did not experience a significant inflation. It should be noted that in a modern banking and credit money system, the direct money  creators are banks rather than the central bank, and QE policies, including central bank  purchases of government bonds, do not necessarily drive money growth. Base money  is different from money in that it mainly serves the purpose of reserve requirements in  the banking system and payment clearing needs. Therefore, it is money that is used in  circulation by economic entities, and it is created by banks through asset expansions,  such as bank loans. Thus, in the long term, it is money and not base money that is  closely related to inflation. After the 2008 crisis, central bank purchases of government  bonds in the US and other advanced economies led to higher excess reserves in the  banking system. But as central bank purchases mainly included existing government  bonds in the market, there were no significant monetized deficits. In addition, the  banking system was not enthusiastic about creating money through bank loans, which  kept the corresponding excess reserves within the banking system and thus did not  cause significant growth of money. From end-August 2008 before the crisis to end-  2017, the balance sheets of the central banks in the US, Europe, and Japan expanded  375 percent, 209 percent, and 375 percent, respectively, while money supply during the  same period only increased 80 percent, 30 percent, and 27 percent, far lower than the  expansion rates of the central bank balance sheets.  Second, QE policies adopted to increase money in coordination with fiscal policies,  which significantly fueled the global inflation in 2021. After the outbreak of the  pandemic in 2020, to address its impact and support an economic recovery, the major  advanced economies adopted a policy combination of an excessively loose monetary  policy and a massive fiscal stimulus, thereby driving money growth through  government-led efforts. From the perspective of the underlying mechanism: the central  bank buys government bonds and increases excess reserves, which are turned into fiscal  deposits through new issues of government bonds; fiscal deposits are then turned into  deposits of economic entities through fiscal spending of households and businesses.  The combinations of these interwoven operations cause money to grow. In 2020, the  US Fed purchased about 52 percent of newly issued Treasury bonds, and the money  supply generated from this support to fiscal spending constituted 61 percent of M2  growth in the US. As of end-2020, money supply in the US, Europe, and Japan recorded  year-on-year growth of 24.9 percent, 12.3 percent, and 7.6 percent, while nominal GDP  growth registered -2.3 percent, -5 percent, and -4 percent, respectively. Money growth  was highly inconsistent with nominal GDP growth. In terms of consumer price  movements, inflation was most serious in the US, and the gap between monetary  expansion and nominal GDP growth was also the widest. The US CPI in June reached  a 13-year high of 5.4 percent, up 4 percentage points from end-2020. Meanwhile, the  CPI in Europe and Japan were up 2.2 and 1.4 percentage points, respectively, from end-  2020. It should also be noted that government-led growth of broad money has  undesirable consequences, such as disrupting financial discipline, damaging the ability  of the banking system to create money in a market-oriented manner, and a lack of  vitality in the economy.  In general, the relationship between money and inflation is unchanged, and a massive  over-issuance of money will inevitably intensify inflation. Therefore, the key to keeping  inflation stable is to maintain sound management of money. Current inflation pressures  in China are generally contained, which can be attributed to the fact that since last May  the growth of money supply in China has been returning to its normal level at a faster  pace than that in other large economies. As of end-June 2021, M2 growth in China  registered 8.6 percent, basically equivalent to its pre-pandemic level and corresponding  to nominal economic growth, thus keeping prices stable from a macro standpoint. Next,  it is necessary that monetary policy continue to prioritize stability. A sound monetary  policy should be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate. The PBC will keep the  growth of money supply and the AFRE generally in line with nominal economic growth,  and it will stick to its role as a fund provider that is separate from the fiscal authorities  so as to fundamentally ensure the overall stability of consumer prices.  IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and  equilibrium level  Since the beginning of 2021, cross-border capital flows and foreign-exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium. Market expectations have been  generally stable. Based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate moved  in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In  H1, the RMB appreciated to some extent against a basket of currencies. At end-June,  the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the  RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at  98.00 and 96.77, respectively, up 3.3 percent and 2.7 percent from end-2020. According  to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), as of end-June 2021,  the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER)  of the RMB have appreciated 2.9 percent and 0.3 percent since end-2020, and 41.7  percent and 51.9 percent since the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism  that began in 2005. The RMB appreciated against the US dollar in H1. At end-June, the  central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.4601, appreciating 1.0 percent  from end-2020 and 28.1 percent on a cumulative basis since the reform of the exchange  rate formation mechanism that began in 2005. In H1, the annualized volatility rate of  the RMB against the US dollar was 3.5 percent.  Cross-border RMB settlements in H1 totaled RMB17.6 trillion, increasing 39 percent  year on year. In particular, RMB receipts and payments registered RMB8.9 trillion and  RMB8.6 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account  grew by 17 percent year on year to RMB3.6 trillion, among which RMB settlements of  trade in goods registered RMB2.7 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in  services and other items registered RMB952.69 billion. Cross-border RMB settlements  under the capital account posted RMB14 trillion, increasing 46 percent year on year. In Q2 2021, the PBC resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements made by  the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and kept the sound monetary policy  flexible and targeted, and at a reasonable and appropriate level. The PBC conducted  open market operations (OMOs) in a targeted manner, advanced the market-based  reforms of interest rates and exchange rates, further leveraged the targeted guidance  role of structural monetary policy instruments, and intensified policy support to areas  that call for long-term support, such as scientific and technological innovations, micro  and small businesses (MSBs), green development, and manufacturing, thus fostering a  favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality economic development.  I. Conducting open market operations  Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. The PBC fully analyzed  market developments in terms of the supply and demand of funds, and conducted  successive open market operations daily to enhance operational flexibility, preciseness,  and effectiveness, to avoid both liquidity strains and excessive idle funds arising from  oversupply and to maintain liquidity within the banking system at a proper and adequate  level that was neither too tight nor loose, with the provision of medium and long-term  liquidity via monetary policy instruments such as the Medium-term Lending Facility  (MLF) as the basis. The central bank‚Äôs cross-cyclical arrangements reduced liquidity  fluctuations, stabilized market expectations, lowered the demand for precautionary  funds, and enhanced the efficiency of its liquidity operations. In late June, the PBC  properly scaled up its open market reverse repurchase operations (repos) to satisfy the  market‚Äôs short-term funding needs at the end of the six-month period and to maintain  money-market stability at the end of the first half-year.  Guiding market rates to move around central bank policy rates. In Q2 2021, both  the rates paid on the MLF and the reverse repos remained unchanged. Meanwhile, the  PBC sent short-term policy rate signals through daily operations of 7-day reverse repos,  and guided money-market rates to move around the OMO rates. As a result, the  fluctuation of interest rates declined further, market expectations became more stable,  and OMO rates played a strengthened role as the pivotal short-term rates. In Q2 2021,  the weighted average rate on 7-day repos between depository institutions in the  interbank market (DR007) averaged 2.16 percent, close to the central bank‚Äôs 7-day  reverse repo rate. The money-market rates at end-Q2 remained stable, and the  deviations from the OMO rates sharply narrowed compared to those in previous years.  Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q2 2021, the  PBC conducted CBS operations three times, with the total amount registering RMB15  billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent.  Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a  monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in  the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds and in supporting the issuance of  perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized  banks.  Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q2 2021, the PBC  issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling  RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10  billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. In H1 2021, the issuance of  six batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills totaled RMB60 billion, which  enriched the RMB investment products and the RMB liquidity management tools in the  Hong Kong market, propelled both domestic and overseas market entities to issue  RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market, and  helped promote the sustainable and sound development of the offshore RMB market.  In H1 2021, offshore RMB bond issuances, excluding RMB-denominated central bank  bills issued in Hong Kong, registered roughly RMB100 billion, a year-on-year increase  of 80 percent. Moreover, the RMB offshore market saw increasingly brisker  transactions Box 2 The Management of Monetary Policy Expectations Attained Notable  Achievements  Developing a mechanism for the management of monetary policy expectations is an  important step to improve a modern monetary policy framework. The increasingly rule based and transparent monetary policy operations as well as the establishment of an  institutionalized monetary policy communications mechanism facilitate effective  management and guidance of public expectations, and they boost the consistency  between market entities and policy goals, thereby stabilizing the macro economy. The  14th Five-year Plan for Economic and Social Development and the Long-range  Objectives through the Year 2035 sets out to improve the formulation and  implementation mechanism for macro policies and to attach importance to the  management and guidance of expectations. In recent years, when formulating and  implementing monetary policies, the PBC has continued to improve expectation  management and it has developed a scientific and effective mechanism for the  management and guidance of monetary policy expectations, thus enhancing the central  bank‚Äôs transparency and accountability.  Enhancing a modern monetary policy framework and elevating monetary policy  transparency. Under a modern monetary policy framework, the PBC clarified its  intermediary target that the growth of money supply and of aggregate financing to the  real economy (AFRE) roughly matched nominal economic growth, clarifying how  monetary policy objectives should be anchored. The PBC improved the policy rates  system with open market operation (OMO) rates and the MLF rates serving as short  and medium-term policy rates respectively and it targeted these two rates in operations,  enabling institutions and the public to observe the monetary policy orientation. The  PBC deepened the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and improved the formation and  transmission mechanism of market-based rates from policy rates to the LPR and to  lending rates, which significantly enhanced policy transmission efficiency and greatly  improved the central bank‚Äôs efficiency in information transmission.  Improving the regular monetary policy communication mechanism and fostering stable  market expectations. The PBC gradually fixed the frequency of expectations  management as it conducted successive daily open market operations and MLF  operations at a fixed time in the middle of each month with the release of operation  arrangements in advance to stabilize market expectations; the PBC illustrated its  monetary policy stance and released monetary policy signals in each of the 12 months,  as in each quarter it held a press briefing on financial statistics in the first month,  released the China Monetary Policy Report in the second month, and held a quarterly  meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee and released an announcement in the third  month; the PBC held working conferences early and mid-year and issued press releases;  the PBC released the Annual Report of the PBC and the Report of China‚Äôs Regional  Financial Development annually to objectively reflect the effects of its monetary  policies.  Diversifying the methods used in monetary policy communications and effectively  enhancing the efficiency of communications with the public. The PBC responded to  market concerns through a wide range of methods, including attending  regular State Council policy briefings and press conferences of the State Council  Information Office, releasing answers to press questions regarding certain policies and  the transcripts of press conferences (briefings), participating in interviews with  domestic and foreign media, and publishing signed articles; the PBC reported its  judgments about the economic and financial situation and about future targeted  approaches to the Financial and Economic Affairs Committee of the National People‚Äôs  Congress (NPC) and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC),  and held consultative meetings with financial experts and industry associations to  introduce the work concerning monetary policies, to exchange ideas, and to establish a  two-way interaction mechanism; the PBC effectively leveraged the combined strength  of its new media matrix, including its WeChat account and Weibo and its Chinese and  English websites, to create a diversified three-dimensional system for expectations  management and guidance.  The effective management of monetary policy expectations primarily lies in the PBC  ‚Äúpracticing what it preaches.‚Äù The mutual verification and coordination between the  PBC‚Äôs policy operations and external communications reinforces the accountability of  monetary policies. In terms of liquidity expectations from the market, the PBC guided  financial institutions to focus on the level of interest rates instead of focusing too much  on the amount of liquidity, and the central bank conducts OMOs each day to send short term policy rate signals. Since the beginning of 2021, the liquidity and money-market  rates have remained stable, with no large fluctuations at the end of each month and at  the end of each quarter, and the deviation of the DR007 in relation to the OMO rates on  the 7-day reverse repos remained low compared with the same period in recent years,  thus providing a stable environment for liquidity management by financial institutions  and for stabilizing market expectations. Stable market expectations further reduced  precautionary liquidity demands and enhanced liquidity stability.  On balance, the management of monetary policy expectations scored notable  achievements as the monetary policy framework was more open and straightforward,  monetary policy operations became more rule-based and transparent, monetary policy  communications were more regular and institutionalized, the efficiency of  communications between the PBC and the public improved significantly, and the  efficiency of monetary policy transmissions was enhanced. In the next stage, the PBC  will continue to uphold the people-centered philosophy of governance, focus on  enhancing the transparency of the monetary policy framework, maintain the efficiency  and fairness of expectations management, further improve equity in access to  information by the public, and bolster the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission  and the accountability of the central bank.  II. Timely conducting Standing Lending Facility and Medium-term Lending  Facility operations  Well-timed MLF operations were conducted. To ensure an appropriate supply of  medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions  of the medium-term policy rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1.25 trillion of  MLF operations in H1, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.95  percent. The MLF operations conducted in Q2 totaled RMB450 billion. At end-June,  the outstanding MLF registered RMB5.40 trillion, RMB250 billion more than that at  the beginning of 2021.  Standing Lending Facility (SLF) operations were conducted in a timely manner.  The demand for short-term liquidity by locally incorporated financial institutions was  met in the full amount. In H1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB59.1 billion in SLF  operations, of which operations in Q2 registered RMB11.6 billion and the balance of  such operations at end-June posted RMB8.6 billion. The SLF rate played its role as the  ceiling of the interest rate corridor, and it safeguarded the smooth operation of the  money market. At end-June, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 3.05  percent, 3.20 percent, and 3.55 percent, respectively, on par with the rates at the end of  the previous quarter. In May 2021, the PBC issued the Notice on Issues Concerning  Improvements in SLF Management (YinFa No.135 [2021]) to strengthen SLF  management. The efficiency of SLF operations improved through a systemic  transformation that enabled small and medium financial institutions to borrow SLF in  the form delivery versus payment (DVP).  .  III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions  The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was raised for financial institutions  and foreign exchange liquidity management of financial institutions was enhanced.  The PBC decided to raise the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by two percentage  points, from 5 percent to 7 percent, effective on June 15, 2021, soaking up foreign  exchange liquidity in the amount of over USD 20 billion.  The required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered by 0.5 percentage  points in an attempt to support the real economy and ensure that costs of overall  financing drop steadily. The PBC decided to reduce the required reserve ratio by 0.5  percentage point, effective on July 15 (not applicable to financial institutions that had  already carried a required reserve ratio of 5 percent), releasing about RMB 1 trillion of  long-term funds. After this round of RRR cuts, the weighted average required reserve  ratio for financial institutions stood at 8.9 percent. This RRR reduction is a conventional  operation following normalization of monetary policies, aimed at improving the  funding structure of financial institutions and enhancing their capability to allocate  funds. First, by keeping adequate liquidity at a reasonable level, the PBC created a  favorable monetary and financial environment for high-quality development and  supply-side structural reform. Second, by optimizing the financing structure of financial  institutions, the PBC effectively expanded the sources of long-term stable funding for  financial institutions to support the real economy and guided these institutions to  actively use the funds released from the RRR reduction to boost support for MSBs.  Third, the RRR reduction lowered the funding costs of financial institutions by  approximately RMB13 billion per year, which further reduced overall social financing  costs through the transmission of financial institutions.  IV. Further improving the macro-prudential management framework  The role of the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) was effectively brought into  play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural  reform of the financial sector. In H1 2021, in line with the requirements for the key  tasks set at the Central Economic Work Conference, the PBC further improved the  MPA and attached more importance to the assessment requirements to support key  areas and weak links. It dynamically adjusted the relevant assessment indicators in an  attempt to guide financial institutions to step up support to provide medium and long term financing to inclusive MSBs and the manufacturing sector.  The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was  improved. In order to implement the requirements established by the Guiding Opinions  on Improving Supervision of Systemically Important Financial Institutions, the PBC  issued supporting regulations in line with the Measures for Assessments of Systemically  Important Banks (SIBs). The PBC, jointly with the CBIRC, drafted the Additional  Regulatory Rules for Systemically Important Banks (Trial) (Exposure Draft)  (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), and solicited public opinion starting from April 2.  The Rules specify additional regulatory requirements on SIBs in terms of an indicator  system, recovery and resolution schemes, and prudential regulatory measures, and they urge the SIBs to reduce systemic risks and to enhance their resilience and bail-in  capabilities.  V. Actively leveraging the role of structural monetary policy instruments  The PBC actively used central bank lending to support rural development, central  bank lending for MSBs, central bank discounts, and other tools to guide financial  institutions to step up support for areas such as MSBs, private firms, agriculture,  rural areas, and rural people as well as for poverty alleviation. The role of central  bank lending was further brought into play to provide targeted liquidity and to serve as  positive incentives. Central bank lending to support rural development and central bank  lending for MSBs was used to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to  expand the supply of credit for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty  alleviation was rolled over according to the current regulations so as to underpin and  consolidate the achievements of poverty eradication. Coordinated development of the  regional economy and finance was promoted with a newly added quota of RMB200  billion of central bank lending to ten provinces with slow credit growth. Locally  incorporated financial institutions were guided to step up policy support for areas such  as agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private enterprises in these ten provinces. As of  end-June, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development stood at  RMB465.3 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty  alleviation posted RMB888.2 billion and RMB201.4 billion, respectively. Outstanding  central bank discounts registered RMB592.2 billion. In H1, the PBC made net  withdrawals of PSLs in the amount of RMB142.4 billion from development and policy  banks, with net withdrawals in Q2 totaling RMB101.4 billion and the outstanding PSLs  registering RMB3.0926 trillion at end-June.  Targeted Medium-term Lending Facility (TMLF) operations maturing in Q2 were  rolled over in the form of MLFs. The TMLFs provided a stable and long-term funding  source for financial institutions to expand their credit supply to MSBs and private firms  with preferential interest rates. On April 15, the PBC conducted one-year MLF  operations totaling RMB150 billion, with a rate of 2.95 percent, including the rollover  of TMLFs maturing in April. At end-June, the TMLFs maturing in Q2 were rolled over  in the form of MLFs, with the outstanding TMLFs posting zero.  Highlighting the characteristics of directness and precision, two monetary policy  instruments that directly support the real economy were continuously promoted,  with the aim of bolstering the development of MSMEs. From the introduction of the  policy in June 2020 to end-June 2021, operations of instruments supporting deferred  repayments of inclusive MSB loans were conducted on a monthly basis and provided a  total of RMB14.5 billion in incentive funds to local corporate banks to support  extensions of repayments of the principal of inclusive small and micro enterprise loans.  A total of RMB1.4478 trillion was used to alleviate the pressures on small and micro  enterprises to repay the principal and interest in stages. The support plan for inclusive  unsecured MSB loans operated on a quarterly basis. Cumulative preferential funding of  RMB221.5 billion was used to provide support for the issuance RMB620.4 billion of  unsecured loans to MSBs, thereby effectively alleviating their difficulties to access  financing. From the beginning of 2020 to June 2021, banking institutions nationwide  deferred RMB11.8 trillion of principal and interest repayments totaling RMB11.8  trillion and issued cumulative inclusive unsecured MSB loans totaling RMB6.9 trillion.  In line with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State  Council, the PBC promoted the launch of instruments in support of carbon  emissions reductions. According to the requirements set forth in the Report on the  Work of the Government and the decisions of the executive meeting of the State Council,  the PBC launched a structural monetary policy instrument supporting carbon emissions  reductions. Through the provision of low-cost funds for eligible financial institutions,  the PBC supported financial institutions by providing funding at preferential interest  rates to key projects that will significantly reduce carbon emissions. As a structural  monetary policy instrument providing direct support for the real economy, the PBC  supported developments in areas of clean energy, energy savings and environmental  protection, and carbon emissions reduction technology in a precise and direct manner,  and it leveraged more social funding to promote carbon emissions reduction. In line  with market-oriented, law-based, and international principles, the design of the  instrument fully exhibits openness and transparency. With such a ‚Äúfeasible, calculable,  and verifiable‚Äù design, the instrument is precise and direct. Being feasible means that  efforts are made to clearly support key areas that will significantly reduce carbon  emissions, including clean energy, energy savings and environmental protection, and  carbon emissions reduction technology. Being calculable means that financial  institutions can calculate the amount of carbon emissions reductions driven by loans,  and they can disclose the information on carbon emissions reductions, subject to social  supervision. Being verifiable means that third-party professional institutions can be  introduced to verify the authenticity of the information disclosed by financial  institutions so as guarantee their policy effects.  Box 3 The Role of Monetary Policy in Supporting Regional Coordinated  Development  At the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), it was  proposed that the principal challenge facing Chinese society has shifted to the gap  between unbalanced and inadequate development and the people‚Äôs ever-growing needs  for a better life. According to the requirements of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th  CPC Central Committee, coordinated development between urban and rural areas and  among regions should be enhanced notably during the 14th Five-Year Plan. Meanwhile,  the new development concept also places an emphasis on coordinated development. At  present, the economic downturn and financial issues are interconnected in some regions,  with a poor cycle between the economy and finance and fairly slow growth of credit.  In order to promote coordinated regional development, targeted measures that suit local  conditions need to be adopted to increase credit supply to regions with slow credit  growth, thereby helping foster a virtuous circle between the economy and finance.  The PBC attaches great importance to promoting coordinated regional  development. Multiple measures have been adopted and coordinated efforts have  been made to guide all kinds of financial institutions to enhance credit support to  regions with slow credit growth, under the precondition that risks are kept well  under control. First, policy banks are guided to remedy their weaknesses in regional  development. The three policy banks, namely, China Development Bank,  Agricultural Development Bank of China, and Export-Import Bank of China, are  required to guarantee that the proportion of new loans in certain regions to their new  loans in 2021 be no less than that in 2020, and they should strive to raise that proportion.  Second, full play should be given to the national commercial banks, especially the large  state-owned banks, to spearhead their role in credit supply. In line with market-oriented  and law-based principles, and under the precondition of sound risk control, banks are  guided to optimize their internal assessments and incentive measures and to increase  the credit supply in the relevant regions according to local conditions so as to support  coordinated regional development. The Agricultural Bank of China is required to  effectively use the preferential required reserve ratio policy granted for its Finance  Division of Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Rural People and to beef up support for  regions with slow credit growth. The proportion of new loans provided by the Finance  Division of Agriculture, Rural Areas, and Rural People to the relevant regions to all  new loans in 2021 should be higher than that in 2020. Third, local financial institutions  should be fully motivated as the central bank increased the quota of central bank lending  by RMB200 billion to the relevant regions. In addition, under the precondition of  guaranteeing the safety of central bank funds, the requirements have been properly  eased for eligible borrowers. Local financial institutions are guided to step up credit  support for weak links, such as agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private enterprises,  under the precondition of sound risk control.  A series of targeted measures have produced positive results. First, support policies  of central bank lending have been promoted in an orderly manner, achieving notable  results in leveraging the loans of locally incorporated financial institutions in certain  regions. As of end-June 2021, the PBC issued central bank lending in the amount of  RMB160 billion, accomplishing 80 percent of the total quota. In H1 2021, new loans  by locally incorporated financial institutions witnessed a notable increase in certain  regions. Second, policy banks and national commercial banks have actively  implemented policies and have stepped up support for regions with fairly slow credit  growth. The supply of credit has been enhanced to relevant regions through increasing  the allocation of credit resources, optimizing the pricing of internal fund transfers and  capital employment, and implementing differentiated internal assessments and  incentive measures.  In H1 2021, the proportion of new loans in certain regions to all new loans issued by  the three policy banks and the six large state-owned commercial banks witnessed a  year-on-year increase. It is the same case with the Finance Division of Agriculture,  Rural Areas, and Rural People of the Agricultural Bank of China. Overall, the credit  situation has obviously improved in regions with slow credit growth. In certain regions,  both the amount of new RMB loans and the proportion to new loans across the country  saw a year-on-year rise in H1 2021.  Going forward, the PBC will continue to effectively implement all measures and  constantly track and monitor the use of RMB200 billion of central bank lending. Further  support will be given to such provinces by the rapid issuance of central bank lending, a  high ratio of utilization, and active introduction of corresponding measures by the local  governments in an attempt to give full play to the leveraging role of central bank lending.  Various kinds of financial institutions will be guided to continuously enhance credit  support for regions with slow credit growth. Efforts will be made to accelerate  improvements in the financial environment, to smooth the virtuous circle between the  economy and finance, and to guide the shift toward positive expectations, so as to create  a favorable environment for achieving high-quality development in certain regions.  VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy to guide structural reform  Financial support to keep businesses and employment stable was enhanced. The  Notice on Promoting the Project of Enhancing the Capacity to Provide Financial  Services for Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises (Yinfa No. 176 [2021]) was  issued, which established detailed requirements for improving the capacity to provide  financial services for MSMEs and strengthened the building of a long-term mechanism  for ‚Äúlending with confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism.‚Äù A dedicated  project with the theme of ‚ÄúLending to Support Small Businesses for Serving the General  Public‚Äôs Livelihood‚Äù was launched in a bid to boost financial support for self-employed  businesses and to further improve financial services. At end-June 2021, outstanding  inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 31 percent year on year to RMB17.7 trillion. These  loans supported 38.30 million MSBs, an increase of 29.2 percent year on year.  Effective support was provided to consolidate and expand the achievements of  poverty eradication and to comprehensively promote rural revitalization. The PBC,  jointly with five other departments, released the Opinions on Financial Support for  Consolidating Achievements in the Critical Battle against Poverty and  Comprehensively Promoting Rural Revitalization (Yinfa No. 171 [2021]), which  adjusted and optimized financial support policies. It clarified priorities and key  measures in terms of effectively linking up the consolidation and expansion of poverty  eradication achievements with rural revitalization, optimized  the comprehensive system of financial organizations in rural areas, integrated and  improved financial products for rural development, and expanded direct financing  channels for agro-related areas. The PBC rolled out appraisal and assessment measures  on financial institutions‚Äô services for rural revitalization in an attempt to enhance  incentive and constraint effects as well as to guide financial institutions to continuously  enhance their financial resource inputs in support of rural revitalization. At end-June  2021, outstanding agro-related loans increased 10.1 percent year on year to RMB41.66  trillion.  Financial support for key areas such as new types of agribusinesses was enhanced  remarkably. The PBC took the lead in issuing the Opinions on Extending Financial  Support for the Development of New Types of Agribusinesses (Yinfa No.133 [2021]).  It guided financial institutions to continuously boost the availability, coverage, and facility of financial services for new types of agribusinesses, promoted the integrated  development of primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in rural areas, and enhanced  the quality, economic performance, and competitiveness of agriculture.  Financial support for key areas such as sci-tech innovations and the  manufacturing sector was strengthened. The PBC made efforts to enhance and  improve financial support for sci-tech innovations, to meet the effective financing  demands of core enterprises aimed at seeking key technology breakthroughs, and to  boost the availability of financing for tech-SMEs. Financial institutions were guided to  increase the supply of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector so as  to promote its high-quality development. At end-June 2021, outstanding medium and  long-term loans to the manufacturing sector soared by 41.6 percent year on year, the  growth of which stood above 40 percent for four consecutive months. In particular,  growth of the high-tech manufacturing sector witnessed a year-on-year increase of 46.3  percent.  Financial support for green development was intensified. A symposium was held  on adjusting the credit structure of major nationwide banks. Financial institutions were  guided to increase their support for green and low-carbon industries. With the aim of  achieving the strategic goals of a carbon emissions peak and carbon neutrality, the PBC  introduced carbon neutrality-related special financial bonds and carbon neutrality related debt financing instruments on the interbank market so as to support projects  with significant effects on carbon emissions reductions. Based on market-oriented  principles, commercial banks were guided to provide reasonable and necessary support  for the transformation and upgrading of coal and other traditional energy industries.  VII. Further deepening the market-based interest rate reform  Since the beginning of 2021, the PBC further deepened the market-based interest-rate  reform, continuously unleashed the potential of the reform in reducing loan interest  rates, and optimized regulation of deposit interest rates, pushing actual loan rates further  downward. First, with continued progress in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and  application of the LPR, the financing costs of enterprises witnessed a further decline.  Second, regulation of deposit rates was improved. After modification, the self disciplined ceiling of deposit rates will be determined by adding basis points to the  benchmark interest rates; this was formally put into practice on June 21. Third, order  in the credit market was regulated. Lenders of all sorts were promoted to explicitly  indicate the annualized interest rates of their loan products so as to effectively protect  the rights of financial consumers to be informed. Fourth, the PBC promoted a shift in  the pricing benchmark for USD floating-rate loans by financial institutions and it  guided the market self-discipline mechanism for interest rates to study and issue the  recommended agreement format for domestic USD floating-rate loans. Starting from  June 1, financial institutions can sign contracts for USD floating-rate loans with  reference to the format or they can make adaptive adjustments to the recommended  format based on actual conditions.  Box 4 Actual Loan Interest Rates were Generally Stable with a Decline  Since the beginning of 2021, the sound monetary policy has maintained stability as its  top priority, reflecting its feature of being forward-looking, targeted, and effective. With  the benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously unleashed, the PBC  improved regulations over deposit rates, promoted explicit indications of annualized  loan rates, safeguarded the sound competitive order in the market, and guided actual  loan rates to remain generally stable with a decline, compared with the historical lowest  level of 2020.  The PBC promoted financial institutions to improve application of the LPR  pricing mechanism and continuously released the potential of the LPR reform.  Banks were guided to incorporate the LPR into their internal funds transfer pricing (FTP)  so as to strengthen the benchmark role of the LPR in their internal and external pricing.  Up until now, all nationwide financial institutions have established relevant rules and  systems of FTP and have continuously improved their loan FTP mechanisms pegged to  the LPR, through which movement of the LPR may be promptly transferred to loan  rates. Locally incorporated financial institutions continuously improved establishment  of the FTP mechanism, with 63 percent of these institutions setting up internal FTP  management systems, 14 percentage points more than before the LPR reform.  Regulations over deposit rates were improved, with bank liability costs basically  stable. On June 21, 2021, the self-disciplinary mechanism for setting interest rates  optimized determination of the self-disciplinary ceiling for deposit interest rates, which  had shifted from multiplying the benchmark deposit rates by a designated multiplier to  adding basis points to the benchmark interest rates. This modification has not only  safeguarded financial institutions‚Äô right of independent pricing but it has also  contributed to orderly market competition. Deposits are guided to return to an  appropriate maturity structure, and the liability costs of banks have stabilized. Currently,  all financial institutions have put in place the relevant requirements of the self disciplinary mechanism for setting interest rates, and the new self-disciplinary ceiling  of interest rates has been implemented in a stable and orderly manner. In terms of  quoted interest rates, they remain basically unchanged for nationwide banks, while  some have been adjusted downwards for medium and long-term deposits by some local  financial institutions that still meet the requirements for the new self-disciplinary  ceiling of interest rates. In practice, within the self-disciplinary ceiling, banks may  independently negotiate with the depositors so as to determine their respective deposit  interest rates.  Explicit indications of annualized loan rates were promoted to safeguard the vital  interests of financial consumers. On March 31, 2021, the PBC issued Announcement  No. 3 [2021], requiring all institutions conducting lending businesses to explicitly  indicate their annualized loan rates, and it specified the calculation methodology.  Meanwhile, the PBC directed the National Internet Finance Association of China to  study the incorporation of annualized loan rates into national standards as mandatory  disclosure requirements. By end-June, 2021, banking institutions had all explicitly  indicated their annualized loan rates, and over 6,000 lending institutions as well as  major internet financial platforms had basically completed this task. In general, explicit  indications of annualized loan rates help borrowers understand actual borrowing costs  and they effectively safeguard the right of financial consumers to be informed.  Actual loan interest rates were generally stable with a decline. Currently, the  Chinese economy has improved steadily with sound momentum, and its growth rate  has basically returned to its potential level. Financial support for the real economy is  strong and solid, and the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE are basically in  line with nominal economic growth. This demonstrates that from a macro perspective,  interest rates remain at a reasonable level in China, which provides a favorable interest rate environment for steady economic operations and high-quality development. In H1  2021, the weighted average rate on loans registered 5.07 percent, down 0.07 percentage  points year on year and 0.08 percentage point compared with that of 2020, respectively.  In particular, interest rates on corporate loans witnessed a greater drop. In H1 2021, the  weighted average rate on corporate loans fell by 0.16 percentage points year on year to  4.63 percent, down 0.09 percentage points compared with that in 2020. The financing  costs of the real economy remained generally stable, albeit with a decline. In an  international comparison, although they were slightly higher than those in the major  advanced economies, the interest rates in China remain relatively low among the  developing countries and the emerging economies. In addition, from the perspective of  the actual interest rates for corporate lending, they are generally on par with the major  commercial banks of China and the US. In Q1 2021, the average corporate lending rate  of the four major commercial banks in the US (Citibank, Bank of America, Wells Fargo,  and JP Morgan) registered 4.03 percent, which was 4.04 percent of the four major  commercial banks in China (the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the  Agricultural Bank of China, Bank of China, and China Construction Bank).  Going forward, the PBC will perfect the market-oriented interest-rate formation and  transmission mechanism and improve the policy rate system of the central bank. It will  continue to unleash the potential of the LPR reform, smooth the transmission channels  for loan interest rates, optimize the allocation structure of financial resources, and  consolidate previous achievements in the reduction of loan interest rates. Meanwhile,  the PBC will optimize regulations over deposit interest rates, keep the banks‚Äô liability  costs basically stable, and urge banks to transfer the policy benefits to the real economy  so as to further bring down the actual loan rates and to secure general stability with a  decline in the overall financing costs for MSBs.  VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism  The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and  to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and  demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It enhanced the RMB exchange rate  flexibility and gave play to the role of the exchange rate in adjusting the macro economy  and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The PBC attached  importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at  an adaptive and equilibrium level. In H1 2021, the highest and lowest RMB central  parities were 6.3572 and 6.5713, respectively, against the USD. During the 118 trading  days, the RMB appreciated on 62 days and depreciated on 56 days. The biggest intraday  appreciation and depreciation were 1.0 percent (648 bps) and 0.8 percent (543 bps),  respectively. The RMB exchange rates against the other major international currencies  floated in two ways. At end-June, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the  euro, and the Japanese yen appreciated 1.0 percent, 4.4 percent, and 8.2 percent,  respectively, from end-2020, while the RMB central parity against the pound had  depreciated 0.6 percent during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange  rate formation mechanism commenced in 2005, the RMB had appreciated by a  cumulative total of 28.1 percent, 30.3 percent, and 25 percent, respectively, against the  dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen by the end of June 2021. Direct RMB trading was  buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped  lower the exchange costs of micro economic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and  investment.  As of end-June, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and  foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of  RMB60.461 billion, and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD475  million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and  investment. Box 5 A Norm of Two-way Fluctuations of the RMB Exchange Rate  In recent years, with the continuous progress in the reform of the RMB exchange rate  formation mechanism, the market has played a decisive role in the formation of the  exchange rate. The RMB exchange rate fluctuates in two ways, both upward and  downward, and the exchange rate flexibility is increasing, creating conditions for  independent implementation of a normal monetary policy.  The current managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and  demand with reference to a basket of currencies is suitable for China‚Äôs conditions  and should be maintained for a long time, which is the basis for the two-way  fluctuations in the RMB exchange rate. A mix of measures adopted by the PBC  work as an integral whole so that the two-way fluctuations of the RMB exchange  rate have become a norm, and the RMB exchange rate is kept basically stable at  an adaptive and equilibrium level. First, the market plays a decisive role in the  formation of the exchange rate. The PBC has withdrawn from regular intervention in  the foreign exchange market. The exchange rate, determined by market supply and  demand, plays the role of a price signal, which improves the efficiency of resource  allocations. Second, the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has  been deepened. In October 2020, the counter cyclical factor faded out of the quotation  model of the RMB central parity against the USD. After the adjustment, the central  parity formation mechanism has become more transparent, benchmarking, and effective,  which also reflects that the market has been given full play in the self-discipline  mechanism of the foreign exchange market. Third, the macro-prudential management  framework for cross-border financing has been improved. Since 2020, in line with  macroeconomic conditions and the balance of payments, the PBC has adjusted the  macro-prudential parameter for cross-border financing of financial institutions and  enterprises and has expanded coverage of the macro-prudential management  framework for cross-border financing. Apart from raising management efficiency, the  PBC has also implemented differentiated policies according to the size of the financial  institutions, ensured the reasonable and orderly succession of policies, and guided  financial institutions to adjust the structure of their assets and liabilities in a market oriented manner. Fourth, expectation management has been emphasized. In the case of  large swings in the RMB exchange rate and market expectations, the PBC responded  actively to market concerns and communicated policy intentions with the market  through various channels so as to curb the overshooting of the foreign exchange market  and to safeguard the market‚Äôs sound operation. Fifth, liquidity in the foreign exchange  market has been adjusted effectively. On May 31, 2021, the PBC announced to raise  the reserve ratio for foreign exchange deposits of financial institutions by 2 percentage  points, from 5 percent to 7 percent. The adjustment was aimed at pumping out part of  the market liquidity and offsetting the impact of the external environment on the  domestic market. Sixth, enterprises and financial institutions have been guided to  establish the concept of ‚Äúrisk neutrality.‚Äù The PBC has guided financial institutions to  provide foreign exchange risk management services to enterprises in line with the  principle that foreign exchange management is based on real needs and should stick to  risk neutrality. Financial institutions have also been guided to maintain sound  operations in a bid to foster the stable and healthy development of the foreign exchange  market.  Beginning from 2020, the two-way fluctuations in the RMB exchange rate have  also reflected the differences in economic cycle and monetary policies at home and  abroad. In the midst of globalization, the economy and finance of various economies  are interacting with one another. The pandemic containment and economic recovery  have been advancing at different paces, and different monetary policies have been  adopted worldwide. The two-way fluctuation of the RMB exchange rate reflects that  the domestic and external economic cycles and monetary policies do not match one  another. In 2020, faced with the global economic impact of COVID-19, China stepped  up its macro-policy response and the PBC kept its sound monetary policy flexible,  appropriate, and targeted, all of which buttressed China‚Äôs leading role in pandemic  containment, resumption of work and production, and attainment of positive economic  growth. China‚Äôs monetary policy started to turn around to normal in May 2020, when  the pandemic was increasingly rampant elsewhere and ultra-loose monetary policies  were being adopted by the major economies. As a result, the RMB appreciated against  the USD and a basket of currencies. In 2020, the RMB central parity appreciated against  the USD by 6.9 percent, less than that of the euro, and the CEFTS index rose by 3.8  percent. Since the beginning of 2021, the COVID-19 vaccination has been making  progress in the developed economies, and reflation trade has been on the rise in the  market. The international financial market has been concerned that the US Fed may  reduce its quantitative easing and raise interest rates in advance. In June, the USD  appreciated against the major currencies, while China insisted on implementing its  normal monetary policies, with its economy operating near its potential growth rate.  The RMB depreciated by 1.4 percent against the USD in the same month, while the  CFETS index remained stable.  On the whole, the two-way fluctuation of the RMB exchange rate results from the  changes in domestic and external economic conditions, the balance of payments, and  the foreign exchange markets both at home and abroad. It reasonably reflects changes  in supply and demand in the foreign exchange market. It plays a role in adjusting the  macro economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments, promotes  both internal and external equilibria, and helps expand the space for implementation of  an independent monetary policy. In the future, it will continue to be a norm for the RMB  exchange rate to fluctuate in two ways, and the RMB may either appreciate or  depreciate, which cannot be accurately predicted by any single person. Going forward,  the PBC will maintain the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market  supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It will appropriately  employ multiple monetary policy tools, enhance macro-prudential management of  cross-border financing, reasonably guide expectations through various means, and help  enterprises and financial institutions establish the concept of ‚Äúrisk neutrality‚Äù so as to  keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.  IX. Promoting reform of financial institutions and resolution of financial risks in  a prudent and orderly manner  Risk resolution and reform and restructuring of small and medium-sized financial  institutions have been promoted in an orderly manner. Since the takeover of the  Baoshang Bank (BSB), there has been steady progress in various relevant tasks,  breaking the rigid payments in an orderly manner, and completing liquidation and asset  verification on schedule. On January 12, 2021, Beijing No.1 Intermediate People‚Äôs  Court held a creditors‚Äô meeting for the first time, and the administrator completed a  review of the claims of 743 creditors. On February 7, Beijing No.1 Intermediate  People‚Äôs Court issued its ruling on the BSB‚Äôs bankruptcy. Equities of former  shareholders were cleared, and large creditors bore partial losses. Risk resolution of the  BSB was basically completed, and the follow-up work was advanced in a steady and  orderly manner. Moreover, the reform and restructuring plan of Hengfeng Bank was  carried out smoothly, and the risk resolution, reform, and restructuring of Jinzhou Bank  was basically completed so as to ensure the sound operation of the financial system and  to firmly defend the bottom line so that no systemic risk should occur.  The reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously  deepened. The PBC advanced comprehensive reform plans for development and policy  financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scope, implement  classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms,  and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial  institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full  play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development  on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control.  X. Deepening reform of foreign exchange arrangements  Continue to strengthen positive incentives for trade facilitation pilot programs.  Persist in high standards when verifying the pilot conditions. Coverage of the  program was expanded in a steady and orderly manner and the pilot program was  further optimized. As of end-June 2021, the pilot program had been expanded to  incorporate 22 areas, 99 banks, and 909 enterprises.  New ideas for international trade management were explored. Based on the pilot  work in Hainan and other places regarding new international trade patterns, the PBC  has supported Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and other regions with actual needs to develop new  offshore international trade and it has guided banks to improve their capability to verify  compliance so as to facilitate real and legitimate business activities.  Two-way individual foreign exchange business was facilitated. The State  Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) issued the Notice on Further Promoting  Facilitation of Individual Foreign Exchange Business under the Current Account  (Huifa [2021] 13), aiming to improve the banks‚Äô capability to handle complex  individual current-account businesses. The SAFE also issued the Individual Foreign  Exchange Business Manual (First Edition) so as to popularize knowledge about  individual foreign exchange policies. Moreover, the SAFE guided its Guangdong and  Shenzhen branches to launch pilot programs to facilitate cross-border insurance  exchange under the current account and to promote the interconnectivity of insurance  markets in Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macau.  Stable and sound operation of the foreign exchange market was maintained. The  PBC enhanced the timeliness and accuracy of off-site inspections and placed emphasis  on punishing illegal financial activities, such as underground banks and cross-border  gambling. Special investigations of key entities were conducted so as to effectively  deter foreign exchange market violations and to maintain an orderly foreign exchange  market. In H1 2021, a total of 1290 foreign exchange violations were investigated and  penalized, with total fines amounting to RMB375 million.  Part 3. Financial Market Conditions  In H1 2021, the financial market generally operated smoothly and steadily. Money  market interest rates remained stable with active market transactions. The bond market  featured generally declining bond coupon rates, increased bond issuances, and  decreased cash bond transactions. The stock market index rose, and both turnover and  the amount of funds raised witnessed year-on-year increases.  I. Financial market overview  1. Money market interest rates remained stable, and the growth of market  transactions slowed down  Money market interest rates were generally stable. In June, the monthly weighted  average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.17 percent, 16 basis points higher than  that in March. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond  repos among depository institutions posted 2.04 percent, 13 basis points lower than the  monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos. In June, the monthly weighted  average interest rate for interbank lending posted 2.13 percent. At end-March, the  overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.18 percent and 2.41 percent, respectively.  Market transactions remain active. In H1 2021, the volume of bond repos trading on  the interbank market reached RMB471.4 trillion, representing an average daily turnover  of RMB3.9 trillion and almost on par with that in the previous year. The volume of  cumulative trading of interbank lending registered RMB58.1 trillion, with an average  daily turnover of RMB476.1 billion and a year-on-year decrease of 26.6 percent. In  terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 83.6 percent of the total  turnover in bond repos, decreasing 1.2 percentage points year on year, and overnight  lending made up 89.2 percent of interbank lending, down 1.4 percentage points year on  year. The volume of bond repos traded on the exchange markets increased 21.6 percent  year on year to RMB156.2 trillion. Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses witnessed orderly  development. In H1 2021, 15,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market,  raising RMB10.9 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled  RMB70.8 trillion. At end-June, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB12.4 trillion.  In H1 2021, the average weighted interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.70  percent, 8 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor. A total of 33,000  negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions in H1 2021, raising RMB6.2  trillion, with an increase of RMB200 billion year on year.  The turnover of interest rate swaps was stable. In H1 2021, the RMB interest rate swap  market witnessed 142,000 transactions, decreasing 1.9 percent year on year, with the  volume of the notional principal totaling RMB11.1 trillion, an increase of 12.7 percent  year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one  year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB8.0  trillion, accounting for 72.0 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing  repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the  RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 85.4 percent and 13.7 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In H1 2021, interest rate swaps anchored to the LPR witnessed 419 transactions, with RMB43.29 billion of the notional principal.  The loan prime rate (LPR) interest rate option business developed steadily. The LPR  interest rate option business made its debut on the interbank market in March 2020, and  fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29,  2021. In H1 2021, a total of 266 interest rate option transactions were concluded,  totaling RMB46.66 billion. Specifically, 29 were interest rate swap transactions,  amounting to RMB1.52 billion of the notional principal, 237 were interest rate cap/floor  transactions, amounting to RMB45.14 billion of the notional principal, 199 were LPR  interest rate transactions, totaling RMB42.61 billion of the notional principal, and 67  were FDR interest rate transactions, amounting to RMB4.05 billion of the notional  principal.  2. Coupon rates of bonds declined while bond issuances expanded  On the whole, coupon rates of bonds declined. In June 2021, the yield on 10-year  government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 3.10 percent, 12 basis  points lower than that in March. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by  the China Development Bank (CDB) was 3.47 percent, 5 basis points lower than the  rate in March. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1)  issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.94 percent, 38 basis points higher than the rate  in March.  On the whole, government securities yields went down in H1. At end-June, yields on  1-year and 10-year government securities decreased by 4 basis points and 7 basis points  to 2.43 percent and 3.08 percent from end-2020, respectively; the spread between 1-  year and 10-year government securities was 65 basis points, down 2 basis points from  end-2020. Credit spreads narrowed at end-June, with yield spreads on 3-year AAA and  AA-rated short-to-medium-term bills and CDB bonds narrowing by 16 basis points and  40 basis points to 40 basis points and 101 basis points from end-2020, respectively.  Bond issuances saw year-on-year growth. In H1, the cumulative value of bond  issuances increased by 13 percent, or RMB3.4 trillion, year on year to RMB29.4 trillion,  most of which were interbank certificates of deposit, which increased by RMB3.1  trillion. At end-June, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB123.6 trillion,  an increase of 15 percent year on year.  The volume of spot bond transactions on the interbank market decreased, while the  exchange volume of spot trading continued to grow. In H1, the value of cash bonds  trading on the bond market posted RMB108.2 trillion, registering a decrease of 15.1  percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank  market was RMB96.7 trillion, representing a decrease of 19 percent year on year. The  value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB11.5 trillion, an  increase of 44 percent year on year. 3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates in the bill market were  basically stable  The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In H1, commercial drafts issued  by enterprises totaled RMB12.3 trillion, rising 5.3 percent year on year. At end-June,  outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB14.3 trillion, increasing by 1.0 percent year  on year. At end-June, outstanding commercial draft acceptances witnessed stable  growth, increasing by RMB250.4 billion from the beginning of this year and RMB252.9  billion from end-March, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers‚Äô acceptances, 67.9  percent were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs).  Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In H1, total  discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB23.8 trillion, growing 7.6 percent  year on year. At end-June, the balance of bill financing was RMB8.6 trillion, down 0.1  percent year on year. The balance accounted for 4.6 percent of total outstanding loans,  down 0.6 percentage points year on year. In H1, the interest rates of bill financing first  increased and then decreased, but they remained generally stable.  4. Stock indices rose, with turnover and the amount of funds raised increasing year  on year  Driven by the economic recovery, stock indices experienced a choppy rise. At end-June,  the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,591 points, increasing by  3.4 percent from end-2020. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at  15,162 points, increasing by 4.8 percent from end-2020. Turnover on the stock markets  expanded. In H1, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the  Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB107.6 trillion, and the average daily turnover  was RMB912.0 billion, representing an increase of 20 percent year on year. The amount  of funds raised on the stock markets surged significantly year on year. In H1, a  cumulative RMB657.8 billion was raised, increasing by 97 percent year on year.  5. Growth of assets in the insurance sector and premium income slowed down  In H1 2021, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB2.9 trillion,  up 5.2 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.9 percentage points from the previous  year. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB765.1 billion, representing a year-on year increase of 21.3 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit  payments increased by 15.8 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and  benefit payments went up by 26.2 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-June 2021, total  assets in the insurance sector increased 12.7 percent year on year to RMB24.8 trillion,  a deceleration of 0.6 percentage point from end-2020. Specifically, bank deposits  decreased by 2.9 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 17.7 percent year  on year.  6. Turnovers of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions witnessed rapid  growth  In H1 2021, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions  registered USD5 trillion, an increase of 44.4 percent year on year. The cumulative  turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD9.3 trillion, an  increase of 26.7 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD  swap transactions posted USD6.2 trillion, accounting for 66.5 percent of the total swap  turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled  USD52.3 billion, rising 1.9 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair  transactions totaled USD608.9 billion, increasing by 97.4 percent year on year. In  particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 60.5  percent of total market share.  7. Gold prices first went up but then dropped In H1 2021, international gold prices closed at USD1,763 per ounce, representing a loss  of 5.9 percent from end-2020. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at  RMB365.82 per gram, decreasing by 6.2 percent from end-2020. In H1 2021, the  volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 18,400 tons, representing  a decrease of 45.5 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB6.96 trillion, a decrease  of 44.0 percent year on year.  II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets  1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market  To better serve market entities and actively respond to market needs, the PBC released  Announcement No. 4 [2021] of the People‚Äôs Bank of China (Revision of the  Announcement on Bond Trading and Circulation in the Interbank Bond Market). The  announcement further improved institutional arrangements and efficiency for bond  trading and circulation, thus enhancing the capability of the bond market to serve the  real economy. To be specific, first, it is clearly specified that infrastructure agencies  shall build direct connections among their systems to achieve an electronic transmission  of information. Second, issuers or lead underwriters are no longer required to provide  the National Interbank Funding Center (NIBFC) with a list of the initial bondholders  and their holdings. Third, the function of infrastructure agencies as intermediary service  providers has been strengthened.  2. Institutional arrangements in the capital market and the securities and futures  industry  The institutional design of the capital market was improved. In April 2021, the CSRC  released the Decision on Revising the ‚ÄúGuidelines for the Evaluation of Sci-Tech  Innovation Attributes (for Trial Implementation), which focused on supporting the core  goals of hard technology and emphasizing substance over form, implementing  classified processing and negative list management and further enriching the evaluation  indicators of science and technology attributes, and strengthening comprehensive  research and judgment. The Guidelines urged intermediaries to shoulder due  responsibilities and reinforce the supervision and inspection of implementation of the  rules so as to improve the quality of companies listed on the Science and Technology  Innovation Board at their source. In May, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on  Improving the Rules for Delisting on the National Equities Exchange and Quotations.  The Guiding Opinions improved the basic institutional framework for both voluntary  and forced delistings, clarified the post-delisting regulatory arrangements, and  emphasized the responsibility of the exchange, thus promoting a more standardized  market exit mechanism.  Protection of legitimate rights and interests of investors was strengthened. In May 2021,  the CSRC released the Elements of Asset Management Product Introduction‚ÄîPart 2:  Asset Management Plan and Related Products Offered by the Securities and Futures  Operators, which introduced the basic elements for asset management plans and  relevant securities and futures products, including their definitions, classifications,  operating modes, and risks, thus making it more convenient for investors to understand  the risk and return characteristics of the products. In June, the CSRC released two codes  concerning the content and format of information disclosures of listed companies for  the purposes of regulating the compiling of periodic reports and information disclosures  of listed companies as well as for safeguarding the investors‚Äô rights to be informed.  Construction of an information-based capital market was promoted. In June 2021, the  CSRC released the Settlement Participant Code for the Securities and Futures Industry  and four other industry standards for the financial sector in order to encourage the  standardization of data and the exchange of information within the sector.  3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market  An exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot was launched. In May 2021, the  CBIRC released the Notice on Exclusive Commercial Pension Insurance Pilots and it  decided to launch an exclusive commercial pension insurance pilot in Zhejiang  Province (including Ningbo City) and Chongqing Municipality for one year starting on  June 1, 2021. The PICC Life Insurance Company Limited and five other life insurance  companies were to carry out the pilot work. The Notice specified the methods of  payment, design of the accumulation period and annuitization period, the insurance  liabilities, rules for insurance cancellation, information disclosures, and product  management. It also made clear the regulatory support policies with respect to equity  asset allocations and the minimum capital requirement.  Corporate governance of insurance companies was improved. In June 2021, the CBIRC  released the Code of Corporate Governance of Banking and Insurance Institutions. The  Code, for the first time at the level of regulatory institutions, put forward general  requirements for the integration of the leadership of the CPC and corporate governance,  and they made clear that CPC organizations in private institutions shall be actively  availed of as political centers. The Code improved the regulatory rules for the corporate  governance of banking and insurance institutions, clarified the responsibilities of  corporate governance bodies, and further standardized operation of the corporate  governance mechanism.  Regulatory requirements for the recovery and resolution plans of insurance institutions  were improved. In June 2021, the CBIRC released the Interim Measures on  Implementing the Recovery and Resolution Plans of Banking and Insurance Institutions.  The Interim Measures specified key elements and the implementation process for the  recovery and resolution plans as well as regulatory management covering resolvability  assessment by regulatory authorities, the improvement of resolvability, and so forth.  The Interim Measures stressed that the recovery and resolution plans shall insist on  using the institution‚Äôs own assets, shareholder assistance, or other market-based  channels to raise funds to carry out a self-rescue, aiming at making institutions assume  primary responsibility and shareholders assume corresponding responsibility, and  avoiding moral hazards.  Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview  I. Global economic and financial developments  In Q2, the global economy on the whole continued to recover, but economic  performance diverged remarkably across regions. The labor market recovered slightly,  and inflation expectations rose remarkably amid the new uncertainties brought about  by the resurgence of the pandemic in many countries. In the future, evolution of the  pandemic will remain the fault line for a global economic recovery. In addition,  persistent high inflation, a possible acceleration of shifts in the monetary policy stances  of the major advanced economies, increased cross-border capital flows, and sharper  volatility of exchange rates and financial markets in the global economies, especially  in the emerging economies, also merit our attention.  1. Economic performance and financial markets of the major economies  The global economy on the whole maintained a momentum for recovery, but  divergences across regions were exacerbated. Among the advanced economies, the US  economic recovery showed a sound momentum as its annualized quarterly rate of GDP  in Q2 reached 6.5 percent and its Manufacturing and Services PMI in June registered  high levels of 60.6 and 60.1, respectively. In the euro area, the annualized quarterly rate  of GDP in Q2 reached 8.3 percent, and the Manufacturing PMI in June hit a record high  of 63.4. In Japan, the annualized quarterly rate of GDP in Q1 contracted to -3.9 percent,  and the Manufacturing PMI edged down to 52.4 in June. Among the emerging  economies, Brazil and India, both of which were severely affected by the pandemic,  witnessed year-on-year quarterly GDP growth of 0.96 percent and 1.64 percent,  respectively, in Q1. In India, the Manufacturing and Services PMI in June dipped to  48.1 and 41.2, respectively.  The resurgence of the pandemic posed a new challenge to prospects for an economic  recovery. Since March, the pandemic has rebounded in many countries, with the  number of single-day newly confirmed cases surpassing the 900,000 mark in April and  still standing at around 400,000 at end-June. Virus mutations and some countries‚Äô  reopening of their economies despite the ongoing pandemic were the major reasons for  the resurgence of the pandemic. The delta variant, which is more contagious than the  previous variants, has been found in at least 98 countries and regions and has become  the prevalent strain in many countries. As a result, pressure for global pandemic  containment is mounting.  Recovery of the labor market was slow. The US unemployment rate registered 5.9  percent in June, edging up from 5.8 percent in May, which indicated that there was still  a long way to go for the job market to return to pre-pandemic levels. The labor  participation rate remained at the low level of 61.6 percent, while job vacancies in June  were over 2 million more than the average level in 2019, demonstrating a lack of  motivation for the unemployed to resume work and the existence of prominent  structural problems, such as the coexistence of difficulties in finding both employees  and employers. Unemployment rates in the euro area in June and the UK in May also  stood at high levels of 7.7 percent and 4.8 percent, respectively. According to the  projections of the International Labour Organization, global unemployment will stand  at no less than 220 million in 2021 and the labor market will not return to pre-pandemic  levels until 2023.  Elevated inflation was common across the globe. In the US, the year-on-year (y-o-y)  growth rate of the CPI increased to 5.4 percent in June, and that of the core CPI posted  4.5 percent, hitting a record high since 1992. In the euro area, the Harmonized Index of  Consumer Prices (HICP) grew by 1.9 percent year on year in June, standing at around  the policy target of 2 percent for two consecutive months. In Japan, deflation pressures  eased slightly, and the CPI in June grew by 0.2 percent year on year, turning positive  for the first time in nine months. Compared with the CPI, the PPI rose more notably. In  June, the PPI in the US and Japan grew by 7.3 percent and 5.0 percent year on year,  respectively, while that in the euro area grew more notably by 10.2 percent. Inflation  pressures also mounted in some emerging economies, with the IPCA of Brazil and the  CPI of Russia growing by 8.4 percent and 6.5 percent year on year, respectively, in June. In terms of the global economic recovery, there was a mismatch between supply and  demand, the prospects for recovery were precarious, market expectations diverged, and  financial markets became more volatile. Commodity prices continued to surge in Q2,  and they became more volatile in July. In Q2, the futures price of Brent crude oil  increased by 16.6 percent, and the futures prices of aluminum and copper in the London  Metal Exchange (LME) increased by 13.3 percent and 7.2 percent, respectively.  International oil prices fluctuated, rebounding after a remarkable drop in mid-July.  Treasury yields underwent adjustments in the advanced economies. Ten-year Treasury  yields in the US dropped from 1.74 percent at end-March to 1.45 percent at end-June,  while those in Germany went up to a high of -0.09 percent in May from -0.27 percent  at end-March and then dropped to -0.23 percent at end-June. On the whole, the stock  markets in the major economies rose, but the volatility increased.  2. Monetary policies of the major economies  Central banks in the major advanced economies maintain accommodative monetary  policy stances. In Q2, the US Fed kept policy rates and the scale of asset purchases  unchanged, but the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in June discussed the  issue of tapering asset purchases. According to the dot-matrix plot, seven out of  eighteen FOMC members projected that policy rates would increase in 2022. The  FOMC in June also made technical adjustments to increase both the interest rate paid  on excess reserve balances and the overnight reverse repo rate by five basis points. The  European Central Bank kept policy rates unchanged and reiterated that it would  accelerate asset purchases, revise the monetary policy framework, and make an  adjustment to adopt a symmetric 2 percent inflation target over the medium term. The  Bank of Japan maintained its current monetary policy and will release plans that  encourage financial institutions to respond to climate changes.  Some emerging market economies began to increase policy rates in response to the  pressures of inflation, capital outflows, and a currency depreciation. Since the  beginning of 2021, the central banks of Russia and Brazil increased policy rates four  Unemployment Rate  (%)  2.6  2.8  2.8  2.9  3.0  3.0  3.1  3.0  3.0  2.9  2.9  2.6  2.8  3.0  2.9  CPI (year-on-year, %) 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.2  0.0  -0.4  -0.9  -1.2  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2  -0.4  -0.1  0.2  NIKKEI 225 (end of  the period)  20194 21878  22288 21710 23140 23185 22977  26434 27444 27663 28966 29179 28813 28860 28792times and three times, respectively, those in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Georgia, and other  countries increased policy rates twice, and those in Mexico, Turkey, Chile, and other  countries increased policy rates once. Against this backdrop, monetary policies  diverged among some emerging economies and advanced economies, which may have  an impact on an economic resurgence and may exacerbate imbalances in the global  economic recovery.  3. Issues that merit attention  First, the global economic recovery may be stalled by recurrent shocks from the  pandemic. Since March, the spread of Covid-19 variants at a faster pace in many  countries has led to a resurgence of the pandemic, which has been a drag on economic  recovery and has dampened market confidence to some extent. In the meantime, with  most developing countries facing vaccine shortages, there is a disparity in vaccination  progress across the globe, which may exacerbate the dual divergence of pandemic  containment and economic recovery.  Second, there is still a mismatch between supply and demand, and it remains to be seen  whether inflation will continue to rise. During the pandemic, ultra-loose monetary  policies adopted by the major advanced economies led to ample market liquidity and  substantial currency growth. In parallel, the pickup in demand outpaced that of supply  in the economic recovery, leading to chip shortages, and freight rates continued to hit  record highs. These have exerted upward pressures on commodity and durable prices.  As a result, short-term increases in global inflation have become a reality. However,  there are still big differences of opinion about whether inflation will continue over the  longer term, which requires close attention.  Third, the shifts in the monetary policies of the major advanced economies may have  spillovers and cause a spread of risks. In addition to increasing inflation pressures, huge  fiscal and monetary policy stimuli since the outbreak of the pandemic have also  spawned bubbles in asset prices, caused a deviation in financial markets from the real  economy, and increased vulnerability. An acceleration of monetary policy shifts in the  major advanced economies in the future may result in adjustments in the valuation of  financial markets, add to pressures on capital outflows and currency depreciation in  most emerging economies, and increase the risks of debt repayments and refinancing.  54II. Macroeconomic developments in China  In H1 2021, achievements to coordinate pandemic containment and economic and  social development in all regions and departments across the country were consolidated  and expanded. China‚Äôs economy sustained a steady recovery, production demand  continued to recoverÔºåand employment and consumer prices were generally stable. The  national economy witnessed steady and sound development. According to preliminary  statistics, GDP in H1 stood at RMB53.2167 trillion, growing by 12.7 percent year on  year on a comparable basis and the average growth rate of GDP during the past two  years was 5.3 percent. GDP in Q2 grew by 7.9 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate of GDP during the past two years was 5.5 percent, an acceleration of 0.5  percentage points from Q1.  1. Consumption gradually improved, investments continuously rebounded, and  imports and exports recorded rapid growth.  Residents‚Äô income grew steadily and people‚Äôs willingness to consume improved. In H1,  the country‚Äôs per capita disposable income increased by 12.6 percent year on year in  nominal terms, or 12.0 percent in real terms, with the average growth rate during the  past two years at 5.2 percent. The increase in residents‚Äô income kept pace with economic  growth. The income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents, and the  structure of income distribution continuously improved. According to the Urban  Depositors‚Äô Survey conducted by the PBC in Q2, 25.1 percent of residents were inclined  to ‚Äúconsume more,‚Äù up 2.8 percentage points from Q1. In H1, total retail sales of  consumer goods grew by 23.0 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during  the past two years was 4.4 percent, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage points from Q1.  Investments rebounded steadily and the structure continued to improve. In H1, total  fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households)  increased by 12.6 percent year on year, and the average growth rate during the past two  years registered 4.4 percent, accelerating 1.5 percentage points from Q1. In terms of  sectors, year-on-year growth of investments in the manufacturing sector was 19.2  percent, 6.6 percentage points higher than that of total investments, and the average  growth rate was 2.0 percent during the past two years. Investments in infrastructure  increased by 7.8 percent, and the average growth rate during the past two years  registered 2.4 percent. Investments in real estate development increased by 15.0 percent,  and the average growth rate during the past two years registered 8.2 percent.  Investments in the high-tech industry saw sound growth and grew by 23.5 percent year on year in H1, and the average growth rate during the past two years registered 14.6  percent, an acceleration of 4.7 percentage points from Q1. Private investment recovered  steadily, growing by 15.4 percent year on year in H1, and the average growth rate during  the past two years was 3.8 percent, an acceleration of 2.1 percentage points from Q1.  Imports and exports continued to grow rapidly. In H1, imports and exports of goods  grew by 27.1 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 28.1 percent year on  year, while imports grew by 25.9 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods  posting RMB1.6336 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve. In H1, the share  of exports of machinery and electronics increased by 0.6 percentage points year on year.  The share of imports and exports under general trade increased by 1.7 percentage points  year on year. The share of imports and exports by private enterprises increased by 2.8  percentage points year on year.  The expectations and confidence of foreign direct investments (FDI) were stable with  promising signs. In H1, actually utilized FDI increased by 28.7 percent year on year to  RMB607.84 billion, which was 27.1 percent higher than that in the same period of 2019.  Actually utilized FDI in the service industry totaled RMB482.77 billion, up 33.4  percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 39.4  percent year on year, among which FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 42.7  percent year on year and FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 29.2  percent year on year.  2. Agricultural production saw another bumper harvest, industrial production  grew steadily, and the service industry recovered continuously  In H1 2021, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by  7.8 percent, 14.8 percent, and 11.8 percent year on year, respectively. The average  growth rate of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries was 4.3 percent, 6.1  percent, and 4.9 percent, respectively, during the past two years.  Agricultural production grew steadily, and China saw another bumper grain harvest this  summer. In H1, the value-added of agriculture grew by 3.6 percent year on year, an  acceleration of 0.3 percentage point from Q1, and the average growth rate was 3.7  percent during the past two years. In H1, the output of summer grains increased by 2.1  percent year on year. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 23.0 percent year on year. Hogs in stock increased by 29.2 percent year on year at end-June.  Industrial production increased steadily, and the industrial structure was continuously  optimized. In H1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size  (IEDS) increased by 15.9 percent year on year and the average growth rate during the  last two years registered 7.0 percent, an acceleration of 0.2 percentage point from Q1.  Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 6.2 percent year on year,  and the average growth rate during the last two years registered 2.5 percent. The  manufacturing sector increased by 17.1 percent year on year, and the average growth  rate during the last two years registered 7.5 percent. The electricity, heat, gas and water  production and supply sectors increased by 13.4 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate during the last two years registered 6.0 percent. The industrial structure was  continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector  increased by 22.6 percent year on year, with the average growth rate posting 13.2  percent during the past two years. In terms of products, the average growth rates of new  energy cars, industrial robots, and integrated circuits all exceeded 30 percent,  respectively.  Growth in the services industry continued to recover, and market expectations improved.  In Q2, the value-added of the tertiary industry grew by 8.3 percent year on year, and  the average growth rate was 5.1 percent during the past two years. In June, the Index of  Service Production (ISP) increased by 10.9 percent year on year, and the average  growth rate registered 6.5 percent during the past two years. From January to May, the  revenue of Service Enterprises Above a Designated Size (SEDS) increased by 31.9  percent year on year and the average growth rate during the last two years registered  11.1 percent, which was 0.2 percentage point higher than that from January to April.  The Business Activities Index for the service industry reached 52.3 percent, remaining  above a critical point for sixteen consecutive months.  3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and producer prices rose greatly  Consumer prices increased moderately. In H1, the CPI increased by 0.5 percent year on  year, an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points from Q1. The CPI in April, May, and June  increased by 0.9 percent, 1.3 percent, and 1.1 percent year on year respectively, and the  core CPI (food and energy excluded) increased by 0.4 percent year on year. As hog  production gradually recovered and the supply of pork continued to increase, the  decline in pork prices expanded, dropping by 19.3 percent year on year in H1. As  Covid-19 prevention and control improved and the suppressed service demand  continuously recovered, the growth of non-food prices rebounded, increasing by 0.7  percent year on year in H1.  Producer prices rose greatly. In H1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 6.8  percent year on year, an acceleration of 4 percentage points from Q1. The growth rate  of PPI in April, May, and June registered 6.8 percent, 9.0 percent, and 8.8 percent,  respectively. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by  7.1 percent year on year, accelerating by 4.3 percentage points from Q1. The Corporate  Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC increased by 5.7 percent year on year,  accelerating by 2.5 percentage points from Q1.  4. Fiscal revenue experienced rapid growth  In H1 2021, revenue in the national general public budget increased by 21.8 percent  year on year to RMB11.7 trillion, accounting for 59.3 percent of annual revenue in the  budget. Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 23.2 percent and 20.6  percent year on year, respectively.  In H1 2021, expenditures in the national general budget saw an increase of 4.5 percent  year on year to RMB12.2 trillion, accounting for 48.6 percent of annual expenditures  in the budget. Specifically, central fiscal expenditures experienced a marginal drop of  6.9 percent year on year, while local fiscal expenditures edged up by 6.4 percent year  on year.  5. The employment situation remained generally stable  In H1 2021, 6.98 million people were newly employed, accounting for 63.5 percent of  the annual employment goal. In June, the surveyed urban unemployment rate was 5.0  percent, on par with that in May and down 0.7 percentage point year on year. The  surveyed urban unemployment rate in 31 major cities was 5.2 percent, on par with that  in May. The average weekly working hours of employees in enterprises were 47.6 hours,  increasing by 0.3 hours month on month.  6. The balance of payments and the external debt  A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments. According to  preliminary statistics, in H1 2021 China‚Äôs current account surplus registered USD122.2  billion. Specifically, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD230.6 billion, whereas  trade in services recorded a deficit of USD43.8 billion. The capital and financial  account deficit was USD122.3 billion. Specifically, direct investments recorded a  surplus of USD123.7 billion. At end-June 2021, foreign exchange reserves posted  USD3.2140 trillion, up 1.4 percent, or USD44.0 billion from end-March. At end-March,  the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign  currencies) posted USD2.5266 trillion. In particular, the short-term external debt  balance was USD1.3987 trillion, accounting for 55 percent of the total external debt  balance.  7. Analysis by sector  7.1 The real estate sector  In H1 2021, housing prices in China remained generally stable. In June, among 70  medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built residential housing prices  increased by 4.3 percent year on year, decelerating by 0.1 percentage points from March,  and second-hand residential housing prices increased by 3.5 percent year on year,  accelerating by 0.2 percentage points from March. Due to the low base figure in the  previous year, housing sales and investments in real estate development experienced  relatively rapid year-on-year growth. In H1, total floor area of sold units increased by  27.7 percent year on year, registering average growth of 8.1 percent during the past two  years. Housing sales increased by 38.9 percent year on year, registering average growth  of 14.7 percent during the past two years. In H1, investments in real estate development  grew by 15 percent year on year, registering average growth of 8.2 percent during the  past two years. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 17  percent year on year, registering average growth of 9.6 percent during the past two years  and accounting for 75.2 percent of total investments in real estate development.  On the whole, growth of real estate loans remained stable. At end-June, outstanding real  estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial  institutions) grew by 9.5 percent year on year to RMB50.8 trillion, a deceleration of 1.4  percentage points from end-March. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans  grew by 13 percent year on year to RMB36.6 trillion, a deceleration of 1.5 percentage  points from end-March. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 3.4 percent  year on year to RMB9.4 trillion, a deceleration of 2.4 percentage points from end March.  7.2 Transformation and development of the coal industry toward achieving a  carbon emissions peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060  The supply-side reform in the coal industry made remarkable progress, which  established a solid foundation for adjustment of the energy structure and the transition  to low carbon development toward achieving a carbon emissions peak before 2030 and  carbon neutrality before 2060. During the 13th Five-Year Plan period from 2016 to  2020, the coal industry enjoyed a shift from extensive growth focusing on quantity and  speed to intensive development focusing on quality and benefits, basically forming a  supply pattern with an advanced production capacity as the mainstay. Arrangements for  coal exploitation continued to improve, with enhanced capability to secure a stable  supply. In 2020, the output of raw coal in Shanxi, Shaanxi, and Inner Mongolia added  up to 2.79 billion tons, accounting for 71.5 percent of total output in China, and the 14  major coal bases produced 96.6 percent of the coal in China. Structural adjustments in  the coal industry made new progress with a remarkably higher degree of industrial  concentration. At end-2020, a total of 5,500 collieries ceased to operate and the  shutdown of outdated coal production capacity exceeded one billion tons per year. The  number of collieries operating nationwide shrank to less than 4,700, with the top eight  producers producing 47.6 percent of total raw coal in China. Clean and efficient use of  coal has accelerated. Remarkable results were achieved in the comprehensive  management of scattered coal as well as in the reduction and replacement of coal use  with alternative energy sources. At end-2020, the installed capacity that had undergone  low-emission and energy-savings transformation in coal-fired power plants across  China reached 950 million kilowatts, accounting for 76 percent of the total installed  capacity of coal-fired power plants nationwide. The scattered coal consumption was  reduced by more than 200 million tons in the "Thirteenth Five-Year Plan" period.  For the coal industry, opportunities and challenges will coexist in the 14th Five-Year  Plan period from 2021 to 2025. Toward achieving its carbon emissions peak before  2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060, stricter measures will be taken to control the  aggregate and intensity of coal consumption, and the proportion of coal in primary  energy consumption will continue to fall. However, some deep-rooted problems in the  coal industry that have been accumulating for a long time are yet to be solved, including  unbalanced productivity development in the industry, some enterprises still running at  a loss, and salient structural problems in coal production and coal products. Hence,  there is much pressure for a low-carbon transformation of the coal industry.  All in all, the function of coal-fired power as the last resort needs to be consolidated. In  the future, the coal industry should adapt to the new stage of development, building up  a new development paradigm for its production chain and supply chain as follows. First,  it needs to continuously improve arrangements in coal exploitation, make clear the  function of grand bases through reasonable classification, and enhance capability to  safeguard the power supply. Second, it should phase out excess production capacity,  shut down outdated production facilities, and build up advanced production facilities in  a way that improves coordination in the coal production chain. Third, it should promote  clean production and the clean and efficient use of coal and accelerate the shift toward  smart production, information-based management, a specialized division of labor, and  clean use of coal.  Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook  IÔºéOutlook for the Chinese economy  Since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and  economic and social development, and the economy has continued recovering and  improving steadily. In Q2, GDP saw a year-on-year growth of 7.9 percent, with the  growth rate averaging 5.5 percent during the past two years, which was 0.5  percentage points higher than that in Q1. In the medium and long term, China‚Äôs  development will still be at an important phase of strategic opportunities, and the  fundamentals of steady economic growth in the long run and high-quality  development will remain unchanged.  China's economy has continued to recover, and the momentum for growth has  been further enhanced. In Q2, the quality and efficiency of industrial production  improved, exports maintained fairly fast growth, investment and consumption sustained  steady recovery, the employment situation was generally stable, and market  expectations remained stable. All of these have established a good foundation for  economic performance in the second half of the year. The sound monetary policy has  maintained continuity, stability, and sustainability, and significant achievements have  been made in managing market expectations in a scientific way, serving the real  economy, preventing and controlling financial risks, and keeping the macro leverage  ratio basically stable. The RMB exchange rate is expected to be stable, and it has been  moving in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing the role of a  macroeconomic stabilizer.  It should also be noted that the global pandemic continues to evolve, the external  environment is becoming more severe and complex, and the domestic economic  recovery remains unstable and imbalanced. The orderly vaccination has generally  boosted the global economic outlook, with the IMF and the World Bank in Q2 both  raising their global economic growth forecasts for 2021. However, with the recent  rampage of coronavirus variants in many countries and the resurgence of COVID-19  cases in several economies, there is still uncertainty about the future evolution of the  pandemic. The spillover effect of the ultra-loose monetary policy in the major  developed economies has become increasingly apparent, leading to significantly higher  inflation. If the pace of their monetary policy shifts accelerates, it may cause global  cross-border capital flows and exchange rate volatility to increase and financial market  valuations to adjust significantly. Domestically, the foundation for an economic  recovery is not yet solid as export growth may slow down due to the high base effect,  investment growth in some areas is relatively weak, contact-based consumption such  as catering and tourism have not been fully restored, and the sustainability of the  momentum for economic growth faces certain challenges. Enterprises‚Äô operating costs  are pushed up as commodity prices rise sharply, bringing great difficulties especially to  some micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Close attention should be  paid to the pressure of a rebound of non-performing assets and shadow banking while  the medium and long-term challenges, such as the decline in potential economic growth  rate, the accelerating aging of the population and green transformation should not be  overlooked. Therefore, it is necessary to be confident and face up to the difficulties.  The PBC will focus on fulfilling its responsibilities by properly handling the  relationship between reforms and macro management, short-term and long-term  considerations, as well as internal and external equilibria in a bid to achieve high quality development.  The CPI is rising moderately and the PPI is rising temporarily. Overall, inflation  pressures are controllable, and there are no grounds for persistent inflation or  deflation. In Q2 2021, under the combined effects of the resumption of travel by  residents, rising gas and diesel prices, and falling pork prices, the CPI was at a low level  of about 1 percent, and was expected to move smoothly within a reasonable range in  the second half of the year. At the same time, due to rising commodity prices and the  low base effect, PPI growth has accelerated, which should be viewed historically and  objectively. On the one hand, as it is a high reading upon the low base of last year, the  change in the PPI can be viewed from an overall perspective based on the figures from  last year, this year, and next year; on the other hand, historically the PPI has witnessed  relatively large fluctuations, and it is not rare that it temporarily underwent a  considerable drop or a surge within a few months. Overall, the rise of China's PPI is  most probably temporary, and the PPI may remain relatively high in the short term. In  the future when the base effect subsides and global supplies gradually recover, the PPI  is likely to fall. In the medium and long term, the decline in labor productivity growth  and the aging population will curb inflation, while the explicit pricing of carbon  emissions will push up prices to some extent, hence being conducive to price stability.  As China's economy is improving steadily and a normal monetary policy has been  maintained since the outbreak of the pandemic last year, domestic aggregate supply and  demand are basically stable, which is conducive to keeping prices stable. Therefore,  there are no grounds for persistent inflation or deflation.  II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage  In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism  with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines of  the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic  Work Conference and will put into practice the requirements set forth in the Report on  the Work of the Government. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC  Central Committee and the State Council, it will adhere to the general principle of  pursuing progress while ensuring stability, apply the new development philosophy fully,  faithfully, and comprehensively, deepen the supply-side structural reform, accelerate  the building of a new development paradigm, and promote high-quality development.  The PBC will work to align this year and next year‚Äôs macro policies in a coordinated  way, maintain the stability of monetary policy, enhance its foresightedness and  effectiveness, and firmly refrain from adopting indiscriminate stimulus measures. By  doing so, it will continue to focus on providing support for the real economy to help  sustain the recovery of small and medium-sized enterprises and industries in difficulties  and to keep the major economic indicators within a reasonable range. With these efforts,  we will get off to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period and the economy will  see sound and sustained growth for the long term.  The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable, and appropriate,  giving top priority to stability. The PBC will remain committed to conducting a normal  monetary policy and attach importance to cross-cycle policy design. The autonomy of  macro policies will be enhanced,, with policy intensity and pace aligned with the  domestic economic situation and price movements. The PBC will properly handle the  relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention to keep the economy  generally stable and to strengthen the resilience of economic development. It will build  a modern central banking system while improving the modern monetary policy  framework and the mechanism for money supply management. It will keep liquidity  adequate at a reasonable level so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate  financing to the real economy (AFRE) are basically in line with nominal economic  growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. Closely following  and studying price movements, the PBC will stabilize social expectations and keep  prices generally stable. In an effort to bring into play the guiding role of structural  monetary policy tools, it will work effectively to implement the decision to extend the  expiration dates of the two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real  economy, and it will issue central bank lendings to provinces with slow credit growth.  Moreover, the PBC will take steps to put into operation the support instruments for  carbon emissions reduction, ramp up support for inclusive finance, and guide financial  institutions to intensify support for sectors such as sci-tech innovation, micro and small  businesses (MSBs), green development, and manufacturing. It will enhance the market oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by further unleashing the  potential of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, improving the central bank policy rate  system, optimizing regulation over deposit rates, and bringing down actual loan rates.  It will deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, enhance the RMB exchange  rate flexibility, stabilize market expectations, strengthen macro-prudential management  of cross-border financing, and guide enterprises and financial institutions to always be  risk-neutral, thereby keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and  equilibrium level. With the aim of firmly defending the bottom line that no systemic  risk should occur, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early  warning, resolution, and accountability, set up a long-term mechanism for forestalling  and defusing financial risks, and replenish the capital of small and medium-sized banks  based on their conditions.  First, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth in money and credit as well as in  the AFRE. It will improve the mechanism for money supply management by enhancing  the long-term mechanisms of liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints with which  the central bank adjusts money creation of commercial banks. The general valve of  money supply will be properly controlled so that the growth rates of money supply and  the AFRE will be basically in line with nominal economic growth and the macro  leverage ratio will be kept basically stable. A mix of monetary policy tools, such as the  Medium-term Lending Facility, open market operations, central bank lending, and  central bank discounts, will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and  to guide market rates to move around policy rates. Moreover, the PBC will reinforce  monitoring and analysis of uncertainties, such as fiscal revenue and expenditures,  government bond issuances, and monetary policy adjustments by the major economies,  to further improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of operations. At  the same time, it will manage policy intensity and pace in line with the development of  the economic and financial situations to provide strong support for the real economy. It  will improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment and prioritize support  for small and medium-sized banks in capital replenishment so that banks will be better  able to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks.  Second, the PBC will move ahead with policy implementation to bring into play  the guiding role of structural monetary policy tools and will promote green low carbon development with the instrument supporting carbon emissions reduction.  It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable while effectively  implementing the decision on extending the expiration dates of the two monetary policy  tools providing direct support for the real economy. It will continue to provide inclusive  and sustained funding support for agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private  enterprises, and it will keep up the intensity of financial support for MSBs so that they  can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and safeguarding employment.  Additionally, it will issue central bank lendings to provinces with slow credit growth in  order to support coordinated development across regions. To help reach the aims of  peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality, the PBC will take steps to  put into operation the instruments supporting carbon emissions reduction, which will  provide low-cost funds for eligible financial institutions to support lending at  preferential interest rates to those areas that will significantly reduce carbon emissions.  It will guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development in line  with market-oriented principles, promote concepts such as green low-carbon life and a  circular economy to the public, and encourage social investment and financing in green  low-carbon fields.  Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective  financial support for the real economy. It will make coordinated efforts to promote  the integrated development of inclusive finance, green finance, sci-tech innovation  finance, and supply chain finance, and it will improve the system for providing financial  support for sci-tech innovation to foster a virtuous cycle among the financial sector, the  sci-tech sector, and industries. It will push for an adjustment and optimization of the  regional credit structure, step up financing support via the multi-tiered capital market,  and improve the regional financial environment. It will ensure that efforts to consolidate  the achievements in poverty eradication join up effectively with rural revitalization  efforts, for which it will continue to provide financial services and support. Emphasis  will also be placed on providing financial services for new types of agribusinesses and  stepping up financial support for key fields, such as food security and development of  the seed industry, to promote the modernization of agriculture and rural areas. Financial  institutions will be urged to optimize their internal resource allocations and policy  arrangements and to enhance the use of sci-tech approaches so that they will be better  able to provide financial services for MSMEs and a long-term mechanism will be  formed whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and  professionalism to provide loans. Moreover, the PBC will improve the system for the  management of carbon neutrality financial bonds to promote their well-regulated  development, and it will impose strict control over credit supply to energy-intensive  and high-emissions projects in order to push for their green transformation and  upgrading. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for  speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term  stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to stabilizing land prices,  housing prices, and expectations, and it will maintain the continuity, consistency, and  stability of real estate finance policies. It will also implement rules for prudential  management of real estate finance and increase financial support for the rental of  housing.  Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate  reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will enhance  the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by continuing  to unleash the potential of the LPR reform and improving the central bank policy rate  system to smooth the channels of interest rate transmission and further bring down  actual loan rates. It will optimize regulation over deposit rates, maintain fair  competition in the deposit market, and keep bank liability costs basically stable. In the  meantime, it will urge banks to transmit policy benefits to the real economy and will  increase competition in the MSB loan market so that MSBs can more easily receive  financing and their comprehensive financing costs will stabilize and fall. Taking steady  steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the  managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with  reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, and  bring into play the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an  automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. It will stabilize market expectations  and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.  The PBC will work on the development of the foreign exchange market. Guiding  enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial  institutions on the provision of services of exchange rate risk management for  enterprises with authentic needs based on the risk-neutral concept, thereby maintaining  the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. The PBC will  continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by launching the  pilot program of high-quality opening-up of cross-border trade and investment, further  facilitating use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, and steadily  advancing convertibility of the RMB under the capital account.  Fifth, the PBC will strengthen fundamental system building in the financial  market to serve the real economy and to guard against market risks. Placing equal  emphasis on preventing risks and promoting development, it will continue to advance  high-quality development of the bond market. In an effort to strengthen the legal  system building in the bond market, the PBC will see that intermediary institutions fulfil  their responsibilities, and it will push for implementation of the requirements for  information disclosures regarding corporate credit bonds and improve the regulations  on credit ratings. In line with market-oriented and law-based principles, the PBC will  continue to put into practice the newly formed mechanisms for bond default resolution  and will crack down on debt evasion. Continued efforts will be made to enhance  fundamental system building in the capital market so as to better protect the interests  of investors and promote the stable and sound development of the capital market.  Sixth, the PBC will push ahead further with the reform of financial institutions  and it will continue to improve corporate governance and optimize financial  supply. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, it will deepen the reform of  large commercial banks and establish a modern financial enterprise system with  Chinese characteristics. Large banks will be guided to shift the focus of their services  to the primary level, while small and medium-sized banks will be encouraged to focus  on their main duties and businesses. With these efforts, the financial market is expected  to become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly  adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed. The reform of development  financial institutions and policy financial institutions will continue, with their  institutional framework improved according to the laws and regulations. Bank-specific  measures will be taken to start reform from incremental businesses and advance the  reform of existing businesses progressively and step by step. These measures are aimed  at carrying out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting,  gradually improving transparency, strengthening capital constraints as well as risk  management, enhancing incentives, and holding the institutions truly accountable. In  this way, the important role of development financial institutions and policy financial  institutions will be better brought into play in serving the real economy and supporting  national strategies.  Seventh, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early  warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism  to forestall and defuse financial risks. It will pay special attention to monitoring and  screening potential risks in key fields, act quickly to shore up weaknesses in the  regulatory framework, accelerate its work to improve the modern financial regulatory  system, and strengthen regulatory coordination. While effectively giving play to the  deposit insurance system, it will focus on early rectification and will further improve  the mechanism for professional and market-oriented risk resolution under the deposit  insurance system. The PBC will make every effort to defuse existing risks and to  contain any possible resurgence of risks. It will intensify efforts to write off non performing assets in the banking system, while capital replenishments for small and  medium-sized banks will be conducted based on their conditions. Moreover, the PBC  will push for implementation of the mechanism for fiscal and financial risk resolution  led by major local officials to stress the responsibilities of local governments for local  risk resolution, and it will urge actions to bring down the number of high-risk  institutions in the provinces of concern. It will also push for implementation of  mechanisms, such as financial risk information sharing and accountability for major  financial risks, to effectively prevent moral hazards. The PBC will work towards  financial risk prevention that is more forward-looking, broad-sighted, and preemptive  so as to firmly defend the bottom line that no systemic risk should occur.  