Part 1 Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2022, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and has implemented the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. The PBC has placed stable growth in a more prominent position and it has strengthened implementation of a sound monetary policy. It has also given full play to the guiding roles of structural monetary policy instruments. Money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) have witnessed reasonable growth, the credit structure has been improved continuously, and overall financing costs have steadily declined, providing vigorous support for stabilizing the macro economy. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has adopted a monetary policy that prioritizes stability while pursuing development, and it has taken prompt measures at an early stage based on changes in the macro situation. It has employed a mix of instruments, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs), and it has turned over its profits to the Central Treasury, thus injecting liquidity into the market. It has also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner, kept liquidity in the banking system adequate at a reasonable level, and brought down interest rates in the money market, creating a favorable liquidity environment for stabilizing the macro economy and keeping economic performance within a reasonable range. At end-September 2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.5 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew rapidly, and lending rates remained at historic lows Credit support for the real economy was strengthened. Since the beginning of Q2, due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the downward pressures on the economy, enterprises, especially micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), have been faced with increasing difficulties in business operations. For a period of time, their demands for credit have been waning and the growth of loans has slowed down. In response, the PBC has successively held a number of symposia to analyze the monetary and credit situations, participated by heads of major financial institutions, the PBC branches at various levels and its affiliated institutions, as well as the policy banks. Financial institutions were encouraged to increase lending based on prudent operations and in line with market-based principles. In Q3, loans continued to accelerate, with newly issued loans registering RMB4.4 and a year-on-year increase of RMB445.6 billion, which revealed continuously enhanced support for the real economy. At end-September, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 10.7 percent year on year to RMB216.6 trillion, an increase of RMB18.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB890.9 billion. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 11.2 percent year on year to RMB210.8 trillion, up RMB18.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion.The credit structure continued to improve. At end-September, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB8.7 trillion as compared to those at the beginning of 2022, accounting for 59.8 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year (YOY) growth of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 30.8 percent, 19.6 percentage points higher than the YOY growth of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 24.6 percent year on year, 13.4 percentage points higher than the growth of total loans; 53.89 million MSBs were supported, a rise of 31.7 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rate of loans hit a statistical low. The PBC continuously deepened the market-oriented reform of interest rates, bringing into play the efficiency of the LPR reform and the key role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates. In mid-September, some national banks took the initiative to lower lending rates, with other banks following suit, which stabilized the liability costs for banks and brought about a further decline in actual lending rates. In September, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.65 percent and 4.30 percent, respectively, down 0.15 percentage points and 0.35 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. In September, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.34 percent, down 0.66 percentage points year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.65 percent, down 0.65 percentage points year on year, while the weighted average interest rate on corporate lending fell by 0.59 percentage points year on year to 4.00 percent. On the whole, interest rates on RMB-denominated loans witnessed a further decline, manifesting robust financial support for the real economy.In September, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 60.75 percent, 5.22 percent, and 34.03 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In September, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 0.60 percent and 2.59 percent, respectively, up 0.50 percentage points and 2.28 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six monthsregistered 3.64 percent and 3.78 percent, up 2.53 and 2.67 percentage points from December 2021, respectively.The growth of deposits picked up steadily. At end-September, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies at all financial institutions increased 10.9 percent year on year to RMB261.3 trillion, up RMB22.7 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB5.5 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 11.3 percent year on year to RMB255.0 trillion, an increase of RMB22.8 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB6.2 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD884.9 billion, a decrease of USD112.1 billion from the beginning of 2022 and a year-on-year deceleration of USD215.5 billion.Box 1 A Proper Assessment of the Widening Deposit–Loan Gap The deposit–loan gap refers to the gap between deposits and loans. As banks increase their holdings of bonds, foreign exchange, equities, and other assets, the share of loans in total assets is on the decline, resulting in a growing deposit–loan gap in China’s banking system. Since the beginning of 2022, the deposit–loan gap in the banking system has widened by a large margin. In the first three quarters of 2022, RMB loans and deposits increased by RMB18.1 trillion and RMB22.8 trillion, respectively. At end-September, the gap between outstanding deposits and outstanding loans was RMB44.2 trillion, up RMB4.7 trillion from end-2021, thus attracting some attention. Some attribute this to the conversion of savings into investments, arguing that the banks’ granting of more loans could narrow the gap. Yet we need to get to the core of the issue and make a proper assessment. In theory, under the current system of credit money, deposits, which are bank liabilities, are created during the process of asset expansion, including the issuance of loans. Instead of resorting to household savings, banks could simply expand assets to grant loans and create deposits (liabilities) at the same time. If they have no other assets than loans and no other liabilities than deposits, then the increase in loans will be accompanied by the same amount of new deposits without any gap between the two. The deposit-loan gap can be explained by the diversified financial support for thereal economy. Apart from loans, banks can also expand assets through the holding of bonds, funds outstanding for foreign exchange and equities, and making other investments. As a result, they can create deposits without scaling up loans. In other words, the widening deposit–loan gap is an outcome of diversifying money creation out of loans. Therefore, the gap cannot be explained by the conversion of savings into investments and thus encouraging banks to increase loans will not help. China is a case in point, where the expansion of the deposit–loan gap reflects macro-policy coordination in support of the real economy. Since the beginning of this year, unexpected factors have tempered credit demand in some sectors of the economy, while pushing up precautionary demand for money in certain circulation links. Shoring up the economy requires stronger monetary support. According to the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, monetary, fiscal, industrial, and other macro policies have formed a synergy, creating more money through channels other than loans. As a result, the deposit–loan gap has widened. First, fiscal departments have increased the issuance of bonds. In the first three quarters of 2022, the cumulative issuance of government bonds totaled RMB5.9 trillion, among which RMB4.7 trillion was held by banks as on-balance-sheet assets. The funds raised were spent by fiscal departments, which were then translated into enterprise and household deposits, thus widening the deposit–loan gap. Second, the central bank turned over the surplus profits to the central budget, which amounted to RMB1.13 trillion in the first three quarters of 2022. With these funds, the fiscal departments implemented tax credit refunds, which increased the deposits of economic entities in the absence of lending activities. As a result, the deposit–loan gap expanded. Third, the methodology for statistics on financial instruments has also contributed to the widening gap. Policy and development banks have launched over RMB600 billion worth of financial instruments this year to replenish capital for major projects on infrastructure, fundamental industries, and the people’s livelihood. Funds raised through these financial instruments were then deposited into banks by project companies. However, they were not calculated as loans from policy and development banks. This statistical methodology has led to a wider deposit–loan gap. Similarly, the major economies have also witnessed a growing deposit–loan gap in recent years, mainly due to the diversification of the banks’ asset structure, especially the banking system’s support for deficit spending. In the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, central banks or banks in the U.S., Europe, Japan, and other major advanced economies supported a fiscal expansion by purchasing government bonds. The funds raised were then spent and became deposits in the real economy, resulting in a larger deposit–loan gap. For instance, the deposit–loan gap in the U.S. surged to over USD3 trillion in February 2020 from less than USD200 billion at end-2007. Asthe U.S. government implemented a large-scale fiscal stimulus after the outbreak of COVID-19, the deposit–loan gap widened further to the elevated level of above USD7 trillion in October 2021. It still remained above USD6 trillion at end-September 2022, despite a moderate decline since the beginning of this year.On the whole, the widening of the deposit–loan gap can be explained by more diversified channels of monetary creation apart from loans with no direct link to the conversion of savings into investments. Since the beginning of this year, deposits in China’s banking system have grown rapidly, and household precautionary savings have also increased due to COVID-19 and other factors. In addition, the cycle between household deposits and corporate deposits was not yet smooth. At end-September, the growth of outstanding household deposits registered 14.5 percent, 3.3 percentage points higher than the growth of 11.2 percent for corporate deposits. From January to September, household deposits increased by RMB13.2 trillion, accounting for 58 percent of total new deposits, 6.9 percentage points higher than that in the same period of 2021. As this structural shift has not reduced the size of total deposits, it has not changed the deposit-loan gap. III. Money supply and the AFRE grew at a reasonable pace The reasonable growth of money and credit aggregates has provided strong support to the real economy. At end-September, outstanding broad money M2, narrow money M1, and currency in circulation M0 registered RMB262.7 trillion, RMB66.5 trillion, and RMB9.9 trillion, respectively, up 12.1 percent, 6.4 percent, and 13.6 percent year on year, respectively. The first three quarters of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB784.7 billion, RMB529.5 billion more than that in the same period of 2021. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB340.65 trillion at end-September. Its year-on-year growth registered 10.6 percent, up 0.3percentage points compared with that at end-2021. In the first three quarters of 2022, the AFRE increment totaled RMB27.77 trillion, RMB3.01 trillion more than that in the same period of 2021. The AFRE has the following structural features: first, the increment in RMB loans grew significantly year on year. In the first three quarters of 2022, the increment in RMB loans issued by financial institutions to the real economy grew by RMB1.06 trillion year on year to RMB17.89 trillion, accounting for 64.4 percent of the AFRE increment during the same period. Second, the increment in government bonds increased year on year, while that in corporate bonds decreased year on year. In the first three quarters of 2022, their numbers were RMB1.5 trillion more and RMB241.3 billion less than those in the corresponding period of the previous year, respectively. Third, off-balance-sheet financing decreased at a slower pace. In the first three quarters of 2022, the increase in entrusted loans was RMB444 billion more than that in the first three quarters of 2021, while decreases in trust loans and undiscounted bankers’ acceptances were RMB745.6 billion and RMB133.7 billion less than that in the same period of 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions decreased by a larger margin year on year, while loans written off grew more than in the previous year.IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level Since the beginning of 2022, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and on the whole market expectations have been generally stable. The market has played a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate and the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as an automatic stabilizer for the macro economy and the balance of payments. In the first three quarters of the year, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate depreciated against a basket of currencies. At end-September, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB Exchange Rate Index and the RMB Exchange Rate Index based on the specialdrawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 101.03 and 98.27, respectively, down 1.4 percent and 2.1 percent from end-2021, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB depreciated 0.2 percent and 4.4 percent, respectively, in the first three quarters of this year. From 2005 when the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation regime began to end-Q3 2022, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated 48.4 percent and 51.2 percent, respectively. In the first three quarters of this year, the RMB depreciated against the US dollar. At end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 7.0998, depreciating 10.2 percent from end-2021 and appreciating 16.6 percent on a cumulative basis since the beginning of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005. In the first three quarters of 2022, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 5.4 percent. In the first three quarters of 2022, cross-border RMB settlements increased 15 percent year on year to RMB31.5 trillion, with RMB receipts and payments posting RMB15.3 trillion and RMB16.2 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 31 percent year on year to RMB7.5 trillion. Specifically, RMB settlements under trade in goods registered RMB5.7 trillion, while RMB settlements under trade in services and under other items registered RMB1.8 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB24 trillion, increasing 11 percent year on year.Part 2 Monetary Policy Operations In Q3 2022, with resolute implementation of the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and in line with the requirement that COVID-19 should be contained, the economy should be stabilized, and development should be safe, the PBC fully implemented a package of policies and follow-up measures to stabilize the economy, attached greater priority to stabilizing economic growth, enhanced implementation of a sound monetary policy, gave full play to the dual functions of monetary policy tools in adjusting the credit aggregate and structure, and guided financial institutions to strongly support the real economy, especially micro and small businesses (MSBs), tech innovation, green development, and infrastructure, thereby standing firm in contributing to the stability of the national economy. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. In Q3 2022, the PBC injected medium and long-term liquidity by adopting a mix of tools, such as the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending, and the turning over of surplus profits. Based on this, the PBC conducted open market operations on a daily basis and, with respect to funding supply and demand, adjusted the scale of open market operations in a flexible and targeted manner, thus keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. On August 15, the rates paid on the open-market 7-day reverse repos and the 1-year MLF both declined by 10 basis points, to 2.0 percent and 2.75 percent, respectively, which was conducive to uplifting market confidence, elevating effective demand, and consolidating the stabilizing and upward trend momentum in economic development. In mid to late September, given the growing short-term liquidity demand driven by factors such as the quarter-end period and the National Day holiday, the PBC conducted 14-day reverse repos on the first business day that these operations would mature in October, thus proactively providing cross-quarter liquidity in advance. Coupled with intensified 7-day reverse repos operations, these efforts stabilized market expectations in a timely manner and effectively maintained money-market stability at the end of the quarter. In Q3, the weighted average rate on 7-day repos between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) posted 1.52 percent, a decrease of 20 basis points from Q2 and 65 basis points from Q3 of 2021. Interest rates witnessed heightened stability at the end of the quarter. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q3 2022, the PBC conducted three batches of CBS operations, totaling RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. Since the beginning of this year, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized banks, and in strengthening credit supply capacity.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q3 2022, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. The regular issuance of central bank bills in Hong Kong is conducive to promoting the sound development of the offshore RMB money market and the bond market and to propelling both domestic and overseas entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market. II. Conducting medium-term lending facility and standing lending facility operations Conducting MLF operations to fully meet market demand. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions of medium-term policy rates for interest rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB2.55 trillion of MLF operations in the first three quarters of 2022, all with a maturity of one year. The interest rate registered 2.85 percent in the first seven months and declined by 10 basis points to 2.75 percent in August and September. In particular, MLF operations conducted in Q3 amounted to RMB900 billion. At end-September, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.55 trillion, which was on par with that at the beginning of 2022. Conducting standing lending facility (SLF) operations. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations and strengthen the stability ofliquidity in the banking system. In the first three quarters, the PBC conducted a total of RMB10.5 billion of SLF operations, of which operations in Q3 registered RMB2.2 billion. The balance of SLF operations at end-September posted RMB800 million. The SLF rate continued to serve as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor and to maintain the smooth operation of the money market. At end-September, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.85 percent, 3.00 percent, and 3.35 percent, respectively, down 0.1 percentage points from those at end-June. III. Adjusting the foreign exchange required reserve ratio for financial institutions The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was lowered for financial institutions to enhance their foreign exchange liquidity management. The PBC lowered the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by 2 percentage points, from 8 percent to 6 percent, effective on September 15, 2022. This move will release around USD17 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. Following the first cut by one percentage point on May 15, this was the second reduction of the ratio this year. IV. Further improving the macro prudential management framework The role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) was given full play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In the first three quarters of 2022, the PBC further optimized the MPA assessment framework and guided financial institutions to enhance stability in the growth of credit aggregates and to ramp up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector, and for green development. The foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales was raised when appropriate. In order to stabilize foreign exchange market expectations and strengthen macro prudential management, the PBC decided to raise the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from 0 to 20 percent, effective from September 28, 2022. The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was refined. The PBC and CBIRC jointly solicited public comments on the Assessment Methodology of Systemically Important Insurance Companies (Exposure Draft) beginning on July 8. The document stipulates the methods, coverage, procedures, and division of work in assessing domestic systemically important insurance companies. On the basis of the size of their assets, the top ten largest insurance groups, life insurance companies, property and casualty insurance companies, and reinsurance companies were assessed based on four dimensions, i.e., size, interconnectedness,asset liquidation, and substitutability. On September 9, the PBC and CBIRC released the list of China’s systemically important banks (SIBs) for 2022. A total of 19 banks were designated as SIBs, consisting of six state-owned commercial banks, nine joint-stock commercial banks, and four city commercial banks. The SIBs fell into five groups in ascending score in terms of systemic importance. Group One contained nine banks, including China Minsheng Bank, China Everbright Bank, Ping An Bank, Huaxia Bank, Bank of Ningbo, China Guangfa Bank, Bank of Jiangsu, Bank of Shanghai, and Bank of Beijing. Group Two contained three banks, including China CITIC Bank, Postal Savings Bank of China, and Shanghai Pudong Development Bank. Group Three contained three banks, including Bank of Communications, China Merchants Bank, and Industrial Bank. Group Four contained four banks, including Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Bank of China, China Construction Bank, and Agricultural Bank of China. At the time, there were no banks included in Group Five. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policy instruments to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and weak links in the economy and for coordinated regional development. Central bank lending to support rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand their credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to current regulations so as to consolidate the achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBC promoted coordinated regional development by guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces to make effective use of policy instruments, such as central bank lending, and to expand credit supply for weak links within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private enterprises. Stepped-up efforts were made to provide relief and assistance for MSBs, and locally incorporated financial institutions were guided to employ central bank lending for MSBs and self-employed businesses that were heavily hit by surging commodity prices and COVID-19, so as to reduce their financing costs. To give play to the role of finance in supporting effective investments, the PBC employed PSL to support the development banks and policy banks in setting up financial instruments and providing credit support for key areas in the infrastructure sector. At end-September, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB558.7 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.3863 trillion and RMB157.6 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB544.9 billion, while outstanding PSL posted RMB2.6481 trillion.Continuously implementing instruments in support of inclusive MSB loans to bolster the development of MSBs. Starting from Q2 2022, the PBC provided incentive funding on a quarterly basis in the amount of 2 percent of the incremental balance of inclusive MSB loans issued by locally incorporated banks so as to encourage the banks to extend inclusive MSB loans. In Q3, the PBC provided incentive funding of RMB8.6 billion to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increase of RMB438.7 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Since implementation of this instrument, incentive funding from the PBC to locally incorporated financial institutions totaled RMB21.3 billion, supporting a total increase of RMB1.2947 trillion in inclusive MSB loans. Implementing both the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal so as to support the green and low-carbon transition of the economy. In Q3, through these two instruments, the PBC provided relevant financial institutions with RMB64.2 billion and RMB22.2 billion, respectively, or total funding of RMB86.4 billion. Since implementation of these two instruments, the PBC cumulatively provided RMB246.9 billion and RMB57.8 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB304.7 billion. In August, Deutsche Bank China and Société Générale China were added to the list of financial institutions eligible for the CERF, showing that China pays great attention to the green transition, always adheres to its opening-up policy, provides foreign financial institutions with national treatment and supports their development in China. Accelerating implementation of special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and the transport and logistics sectors, respectively. In Q3, through the aforementioned three instruments, the PBC provided relevant financial institutions with central bank lending totaling RMB80 billion, RMB400 million, and RMB10.3 billion, respectively. In October, the quota for special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation was increased by RMB200 billion, further enhancing support for innovative sci-tech enterprises. Establishing the special central bank lending facility for equipment upgrading to support financial institutions in providing loans to sectors including infrastructure, social services, MSMEs, and self-employed businesses. In September, the PBC, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), the Ministry of Finance, the National Audit Office, and the CBIRC jointly issued the Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for Equipment Upgrading (Yinfa No.211 [2022]). With the aim of providing targeted liquidity and incentives and in line with market-oriented principles, the special central bank lending facility for equipment upgrading was established with a quota of over RMB200 billion to support financial institutions to provide loans with an interest rate no greater than 3.2 percent sectors to enterprises in relevant sectors to upgrade their equipment. The facility has adopted a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a monthly basis. Specifically, financial institutions are subject totheir own decision-making at their own risk, and they can apply for funding support from the PBC under the special central bank lending facility after they grant loans to eligible enterprises in the relevant sectors. For qualified loans, the PBC provides funding for 100 percent of the principal through central bank lending with an interest rate of 1.75 percent, while the Ministry of Finance offers an interest subsidy of 2.5 percentage points. The PBC and the relevant departments set up a cross-department cooperation mechanism following release of the policy to design implementation plans for this facility and to track and guide banks in accelerating the approval and issuance of loans, so as to promote early policy implementation and ensure it will deliver results as soon as possible. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in structural guidance Constantly enhancing financial services for MSBs. We encouraged financial institutions to follow market-oriented principles to allow deferrals of principal and interest repayments on loans to eligible MSBs and self-employed businesses as well as truck drivers and on individual housing loans and consumer loans. We ramped up implementation of supportive instruments for inclusive MSB loans to better guide and support the granting of MSB loans by locally incorporated banks. We urged financial institutions to fully implement the requirements of the Notice of the People’s Bank of China on Promoting the Establishment of the Long-term Mechanism for Boosting the Confidence, Willingness, Capability, and Professionalism of Financial Institutions to Lend to Micro and Small Businesses and Private Businessess, to enhance their allocation of internal resources and policy arrangements, to improve their use of sci-tech measures, to constantly increase MSB lending, and to boost financial services for MSBs. As of end-September, inclusive MSB loans registered a year-on-year increase of 24.6 percent to an outstanding amount of RMB23.2 trillion, which has been granted to 53.89 million MSBs, an increase of 31.7 percent from the previous year. Box 2 Leveraging the Role of Policy-based and Development-oriented Financial Instruments to Help Boost Infrastructure Construction and Stabilize the Economy It was highlighted at the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China that the nation will develop a modern infrastructure system. The 11th session of the Central Financial and Economic Affairs Commission underscored that infrastructure does the heavy lifting to support economic and social development, and efforts should be made to meet the financing needs of infrastructure construction and to broaden long-term fundraising channels so as to ensure that the funding needs of the nation’s major infrastructure projects will be met. Since the beginning of 2022, the Chinese economy has been facing downward pressures amid a range of factors, and infrastructure construction and investment has served as an important means to stabilize the economy. In accordance with the policy arrangements of the CPC CentralCommittee and the State Council and the requirements of the State Council’s Financial Stability and Development Committee, in June 2022 the PBC supported the China Development Bank and the Agriculture Development Bank of China to set up financial instruments, with a combined scale of RMB300 billion. to address difficulties in fully funding major projects. The funds raised via these instruments aim to replenish capital for major projects such as new infrastructure or to bridge financing for projects backed by special-purpose bonds. The State Council executive meeting noted on August 24, 2022 that an additional quota of over RMB300 billion would be allocated following the first batch of financial instruments in the amount of RMB300 billion was put in place, and the Export-Import Bank of China was to be included to provide such instruments. Implementation of policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments calls for well-designed working mechanisms. The PBC worked with the NDRC, MOF, and CBIRC to further improve the institutional arrangements. First, funds from financial instruments should be invested in projects chosen independently by policy banks per market-oriented and law-based principles. The NDRC, along with local governments, relevant ministries. and enterprises directly under the central government selected an adequate number of potential projects, thus creating favorable conditions for independent investments by these three banks. Second, moral hazards should be guarded against to foster the smooth completion of the projects. It is clearly defined that the investment amount via financial instruments of each individual project should not exceed 50 percent of its capital, therefore ramping up support and guiding the project owners to ensure the connection of capital from other sources and supporting funding schemes for the completion of the projects. Third, a coordination mechanism should be established to strengthen holistic support. Ensuring that funds are in place is the first step in the process of construction, and economic and social benefits can only be achieved after the kick-off of major projects. The NDRC took the lead in establishing a coordination mechanism, and 18 ministries worked cooperatively and efficiently to ramp up holistic support and to ensure that concrete progress should gather pace in project construction. Financial instruments have effectively supported infrastructure construction and helped stabilize the economy thanks to concerted efforts by relevant parties. First, stepped-up efforts have been made to fix capital shortfalls of major projects. As of end-October 2022, two batches of financial instruments have injected RMB740 billion into projects, strongly supporting capital replenishment of major projects in areas such as transportation, energy, water conservancy, municipal construction, and industrial upgrading infrastructure. Second, supporting financing has been provided vigorously. Policy and development banks are encouraged to make effective use of the new credit line of RMB800 billion, and commercial banksare guided to follow up the supporting financing needs of major projects via syndicated loans. Credit lines of more than RMB3.5 trillion have been granted to projects backed by the banks’ financial instruments to meet the differentiated financing needs for project construction. Third, concrete progress in project construction has been expedited. Projects supported by the first batch of financial instruments of RMB300 billion were all under construction in Q3 2022 and project construction backed by the second batch is scheduled to kick off in stages in Q4 to ensure the start of more projects in 2022. Cumulative infrastructure investments in the first three quarters of this year grew by 8.6 percent from the previous year, a figure remarkably higher than the annual growth of 0.4 percent in the previous year. The rapid implementation of projects backed by financial instruments will continuously deliver the combined effects of boosting investment, driving employment, and promoting consumption. In the next stage, the PBC will follow the policy arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, cooperate on and promote the start of projects, and ensure the provision of funding for infrastructure construction, speed up the putting in place capital from other sources, accelerate the use of funds from financial instruments, support the continuity of and connections with supporting financing schemes, and foster more effective investments in a faster manner in an effort to consolidate the stabilizing and upward trend of the momentum of the economy. Making further headway in providing financial services for rural revitalization. We continued to put in place the Opinions on Ensuring Financial Support for Advancing Rural Revitalization on All Fronts in 2022 and worked with a number of ministries to release the Notice on Ensuring the Purchase of Autumn Grain and the Implementation Plan for Rural Road Construction to Expand Investment, Stabilize Employment, and Better Serve Rural Revitalization. We held seminars on how to provide financial services for rural revitalization in related areas, conducted investigations and research into financial services for seed companies, guided financial institutions to further increase the supply of financing to key areas, such as securing the supply of grain and key agricultural products, underpinning the foundations for modern agriculture, and promoting rural construction, thus continuously enhancing the quality and efficiency of financial services for rural revitalization. As of end-September, outstanding agro-related loans registered a year-on-year increase of 13.7 percent, reaching RMB48.49 trillion, among which loans to rural infrastructure construction and to basic farmland construction grew by 16.5 percent and 25.9 percent, respectively. Further expanding medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector. We encouraged banks to channel more resources into this area. Under thecoordination mechanism for promoting effective investments in major projects, banks are encouraged to establish task forces for expanding medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector, speed up financing matchmaking, track these matchmaking schemes, and boost lending efficiency. We have organized a number of meetings to promote this work, strengthened policy guidance and supervision, and responded to the concerns of market entities in a timely manner. Medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector continued to maintain rapid growth, registering an outstanding amount of RMB8.75 trillion at end-September. Its year-on-year growth of 30.8 percent surpassed overall loan growth by nearly 20 percent. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform have been continuously unleashed and oversight on deposit rates has been improved, thus further bringing down the actual loan rates. The LPR reform was further promoted to play its guiding role. The one-year and over-five-year LPR have dropped 0.15 and 0.35 percentage points, respectively, this year, leading to slightly declining but still stable actual rates for corporate loans. Corporate financing costs have dropped significantly. The weighted average loan rate in September fell 0.66 percentage points year on year to 4.34 percent. In particular, the weighted average rate on corporate loans dropped by 0.59 percentage points year on year, reaching a record low of 4.0 percent. The market-oriented deposit rate adjustment mechanism played a significant role. In mid-September, several nationwide banks lowered their deposit rates, encouraging other banks to follow suit. This self-adjustment by banks based on market rate conditions marks a crucial step forward in the market-oriented reform of deposit rates. The weighted average rate on term deposits in September posted 2.30 percent, a decrease of 0.14 percentage points from April before the adjustment mechanism was established. This helps reduce the banks’ liability costs and promotes lower actual loan rates, thereby providing favorable conditions for high-quality economic development. The PBC temporarily lowered the interest rate floor on commercial personal housing loans for first homes in some cities and encouraged the corresponding local governments to fully employ policy tools for the stable and sound development of the real estate market. In addition, the interest rate on personal housing provident fund loans for first-time home buyers was lowered by 0.15 percentage points to meet basic funding demands of fund users. Box 3 Temporary Lowering of the Interest Rate Floor on First-home Loans in Some CitiesOn September 29, 2022, the PBC and CBIRC released a notice to temporarily lower the interest rate floor on first-home loans in some cities. The local governments of the qualified cities can decide whether to maintain, lower, or remove the interest rate floor on newly issued first-home loans until end-2022. Currently, there are two types of personal housing loans in China: commercial housing loans and personal housing provident fund loans. The commercial housing loans adopt “three-layer pricing”: first, the PBC and CBIRC determine the interest rate floor at the national level; based on this “bottom line,” the municipal governments set the floor at the local level according to the “city-specific” principle; then, at the bank level, the commercial bank reached an agreement with the borrower on a specific interest rate after considering the funding costs and the credit risk. Currently, the interest rate floor on commercial first-home loans at the national level is equal to the LPR less 20 basis points. The floor on second-home loans is equal to the LPR plus 60 basis points. The interest rate on personal housing provident fund loans is determined and distributed by the PBC. The policy introduced on September 29 is applicable to cities with continuous declines in both month-on-month and year-on-year price growth of newly constructed commercial housing between June and August (there are 23 qualified cities according to the 70 Major Cities Index published by the National Bureau of Statistics). The LPR-minus-20 basis points interest rate floor on commercial first-home loans can be lowered until end-2022. This temporary policy is targeted at commercial housing loans for first-time home buyers. It lasts until end-2022, after which the previous policy will automatically take effect again. This arrangement helps qualified local governments to fully employ policy tools based on local property market conditions. It better supports basic housing demands and reflects that “housing is for living in, not for speculation,” thus safeguarding the stable and sound development of the real estate market. Local governments have actively responded to the policy through corresponding adjustments. In cities including Jining of Shandong Province, Huanggang of Hubei, Qingyuan and Yangjiang of Guangdong, and Wenzhou and Zhoushan of Zhejiang, the interest rate floors on newly issued first-home loans have been lowered by 15–40 basis points to the LPR minus 35–60 basis points. Some cities in Hubei and Guangdong provinces have temporarily removed the interest rate floor on these loans. In terms of the actual rates on commercial housing loans, the newly issued loans in October 2022 carried an average rate of 4.3 percent, decreasing 4 basis points from the previous month and 133 basis points from the end of the previous year. Meanwhile, as another supportive measure for people with basic housing demands, onOctober 1, 2022, the PBC lowered the interest rates on personal housing provident fund loans for first-time home buyers by 0.15 percentage points. The subsequent rates on loans with maturities within and over 5 years are 2.6 percent and 3.1 percent, respectively. This is the first reduction in the interest rate of these first-home loans since August 2015. The interest rate policy for second-time personal housing provident fund loans remains unchanged: the rates on loans with maturities within and over 5 years should be no less than 3.025 percent and 3.575 percent, respectively. In the next step, the PBC will maintain the principle that “housing is for living in, not for speculation,” fully implement the long-term mechanism for the real estate market, ensure differentiated credit policy implementation by adhering to the “city-specific” principle, and better satisfy a reasonable housing demand to promote stable and sound development of the real estate market. VIII. Advancing the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate The PBC continued to advance the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate and improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. The market continued to play a decisive role in determining the exchange rate. The PBC focused on guiding expectations and enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate while keeping it basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The RMB’s currency value and purchasing power were also basically stable, and the exchange rate continued to play a role in macroeconomic management and as an auto stabilizer for the balance of payments. In Q3 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the US dollar were 6.6863 and 7.1107, respectively. During the 65 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 27 days and depreciated on 38 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 0.47 percent (320 bps) and 0.6 percent (424 bps), respectively. The RMB depreciated against the dollar while it appreciated against other major currencies. As of end-September, the central parity of the RMB against the dollar depreciated 10.2 percent from end-2021, while the central parity of the RMB against the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen appreciated 3.3 percent, 8.3 percent, and 12.5 percent, respectively, during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism that commenced in 2005 to end-September 2022, the RMB appreciated by a cumulative total of 16.6 percent, 43.3 percent, and 48.3 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreignexchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs for microeconomic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and investment. As of end-September, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and the foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB84.262 billion and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD360 million. These operations actively promoted bilateral trade and investment.Box 4 A Solid Foundation for Maintaining Basic Stability of the RMB Exchange Rate Since 2022, the RMB exchange rate has been kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and supply and demand in the foreign exchange market has achieved an overall balance. Specifically, development of the exchange rate has the following two characteristics. First, in terms of the bilateral exchange rate, the RMB has depreciated only against the US dollar and it has appreciated against the other major currencies. Due to the impact of several factors such as the accelerated and enhanced tightening of the Fed’s monetary policy and rising risk-aversion sentiments, the US dollar has witnessed fairly robust performance, with the US dollar Index increasing by approximately 17 percent in Q3. However, from the beginning of 2022 to end-September, the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yensignificantly weakened and hit historical low levels, depreciating by 13.8 percent, 17.5 percent, and 20.5 percent against the US dollar, respectively. Impacted by the price comparison effect, the RMB depreciated against the US dollar by about 10 percent over the same period, while it appreciated against the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen by 3.3 percent, 8.3 percent, and 12.5 percent, respectively. In addition, the RMB appreciated against the currencies in the peripheral economies such as the Thai baht and the South Korean won and against the currencies of the emerging economies such as the South African Rand to differing extents. Second, the RMB exchange rate has been kept basically stable against a basket of currencies. For 2022, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB Index generally stayed above 100 and hit a high of over 107 in March, weighing the RMB exchange rate against a basket of currencies. The SDR Currency Basket RMB Index and the BIS Currency Basket RMB Index witnessed slight depreciations in the first three quarters of 2022. As a weighted average exchange rate, the Exchange Rate Indices are mainly used to comprehensively calculate the movements of the home currency against a basket of foreign currencies. Compared with the bilateral exchange rates, they can more comprehensively and objectively reflect the valuation changes of the home currency against a basket of foreign currencies. From this perspective, globally the value of the RMB has remained stable. Going forward, there will be a solid foundation for the RMB exchange rate to continuously be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, supported by the fundamentals and policies. In terms of the fundamentals, first, the domestic economy is generally stable with an upward trend in momentum, which is the biggest fundamental for the stability of the exchange rate. Since May, a package of policies to stabilize the economy and subsequent measures have been implemented and put into effect, forcefully stabilizing market expectations and confidence. Thereby, the economy rebounded and improved. According to the unified arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, emphasis has been placed on guaranteeing the supply and price stability of food and energy. The monetary and fiscal policies have proved to be forceful, well-measured, and effective in accomplishing the task of maintaining price stability against the global backdrop of high inflation, which is not an easy task. Though facing downward pressures in the short run, the Chinese economy still has strong resilience, enormous potential, and abundant vigor and the fundamentals for long-term growth remain unchanged, which is still an important stabilizer and powerhouse for global economic growth. Second, the foundation for the balance of payments is solid, which is also the fundamental basis for the stable operation of the foreign exchange market. In the first three quarters of 2022, the surplus under the current account stood at USD310.4 billion, increasing 56 percent year on year. In particular, the trade in goods surplus for the first three quarters postedat USD645.2 billion, rising 52 percent year on year. The abundant fund net inflows from the trade channel have sufficiently satisfied the demand of domestic enterprises and residents for foreign exchange, which constitutes the fundamental basis for the balanced supply and demand of foreign exchange and the stable operation of the foreign exchange market. Meanwhile, the status of the RMB as a reserve currency has been raised further, maintaining a strong attraction to global investors. On May 11, the weight of the RMB in the SDR currency basket of the IMF was raised from 10.92 percent to 12.28 percent. Third, China’s foreign exchange reserves rank first globally, which is the cornerstone for maintaining exchange rate stability and safeguarding financial security. At end-September 2022, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.03 trillion, continuously remaining above USD3 trillion, which will cover foreign exchange payments for imports for over one year. At end-June, according to the international investment position table, external assets hit USD9.2 trillion. Compared with the foreign exchange reserves, the short-term external debt remained at a low level. Therefore, the foreign exchange held by the state, the financial sector, and economic entities is sufficient to withstand external shocks. In terms of policies, first, the PBC has adhered to the principle of allowing the market to play a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate. In China, the PBC implements a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. With the continuous deepening of the market-oriented foreign exchange reform and the constant improvements in macro-prudential management, full play can be given to the “two hands” of the market and the government. Meanwhile, the PBC has exited from normal interventions, and it lets market supply and demand decide on the RMB exchange rate. The formation mechanism for the RMB central parity against the USD. which is more rule-based, transparent, and market-oriented, has continuously improved, The elasticity of the exchange rate has been obviously enhanced, better playing its role in adjusting the macro economy and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. The market-oriented RMB exchange rate has enhanced the autonomy of monetary policy. The PBC has implemented a sound monetary policy with a focus on domestic conditions, balanced international payments, and it promoted a balance between internal and external equilibria, which is conducive to long-term economic development. Second, this mechanism has withstood the test of several rounds of external shocks in history. Amid the multiple rounds of major shocks, such as the international financial crisis, global trade frictions, the global spread of COVID-19, global inflation, and the tightening of monetary policy in the developed economies, the RMB exchange rate has been flexibly adjusted and it has achieved an equilibrium within a short period, effectively playing its role as a “cushion” against external shocks. After several rounds of exchange rate overshooting, the PBC has accumulated rich experience in dealing with the situation and it can effectively manage market expectations, providing strong support for the stability ofthe exchange rate. Going forward, the PBC will continue to implement the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It will adhere to letting the market play a decisive role in the formation of the exchange rate. Adopting comprehensive measures, the PBC will stabilize expectations, enhance the elasticity of the RMB exchange rate, and guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral. Determined to smooth large fluctuations in the exchange rate, the PBC will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions New achievements were made to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with some prominent financial risks properly managed. Addressing the risks of key groups and large enterprises was steadily advanced. The central bank rating of financial institutions in Q2 2022 was completed, which indicated that the number of high-risk financial institutions had been reduced virtually by one-half from the peak. The PBC conducted stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions, and it gradually established a stress-testing framework in line with the domestic financial situation. It also strengthened the monitoring and early warnings on bank risks, made timely corrections in response to the emerging problems of banks, and guided any anomaly indexes in most of the banks to return to normal, thereby promoting early identification and resolution of risks. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scopes, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main businesses, and give full play to their roles in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthened risk prevention and control. X. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Enhancing the coverage and quality of facilitation policies for quality enterprises. The SAFE continuously conducted policy promotion and training, shared the bestpractices of business conduct by banks, and improved management on entry guidance, evaluation of effectiveness, and exit supervision, which constantly improved the facilitation experience of market entities. As of end-September, 251 banks were eligible for facilitation policies, conducting 1.631 million business facilitations for 5,023 enterprises, in an amount totaling USD967.4 billion. Optimizing policies to facilitate cross-border use of funds for multinational corporations. In July 2022, the Reply by the State Administration of Foreign Exchange on Conducting the Second Batch of Pilot Projects to Integrate Local and Foreign Currency Capital Pools for Multinational Corporations in Shanghai and Other Regions was issued. Forty enterprises in regions, such as Shanghai, Guangdong, Shaanxi, Beijing, Shenzhen, Zhejiang, Qingdao, and Ningbo, were permitted to carry out the pilot program of integrating their local and foreign currency capital pools. Administrative policies were further optimized, facilitating the coordinated use of cross-border funds for multinational corporations. Part 3 Financial Market Conditions In Q3 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates continued to feature a downward movement, with increased transaction volumes. The interest rates of bond issuances generally dropped, with issuance volumes picking up. The stock market index moved downward such that turnover and the amount of fundraising were decreasing year on year. In the insurance industry, premium revenue rose year on year, and asset growth accelerated. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates witnessed a continuous decline, with increased market transactions In September 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 1.41 percent, and the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos posted 1.46 percent, 15 basis points and 11 basis points, lower than those in June 2022, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate for government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.31 percent, 15 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos in the interbank market. At end-September, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.08 percent and 2.06 percent, respectively, down 14 basis points and 21 basis points from end-September 2021, respectively. Market transaction volumes increased. In Q1–Q3 2022, the volume of bond repostrading on the interbank market reached RMB1047.6 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB5.6 trillion, up 40.1 percent year on year. The cumulative volume of trading for interbank lending registered RMB114.2 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB610.8 billion and a year-on-year increase of 30.6 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 86.6 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2.8 percentage points year on year, and overnight lending constituted 89.5 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, up 0.3 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 18.4 percent year on year to RMB297.7 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposits (CDs) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In Q3 2022, about 6,091 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market,raising RMB4.8 trillion. The total volume of trading on the secondary market registered RMB72.8 trillion. At end-September, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.5 trillion. In Q3 2022, the weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 1.72 percent, 1 basis point lower than that of the 3-month Shibor. In Q3 2022, about 11,561 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB2.7 trillion, an increase of RMB301.3 billion year on year. Interest rate swap transactions witnessed steady operations. In Q3 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 72,000 transactions, increasing 15.4 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB6.3 trillion, an increase of 15.1 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly, and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB4.3 trillion, accounting for 68.6 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate (FDR) and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 88.9 percent and 10.6 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q3 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 203 transactions, with RMB26.27 billion of the notional principal.The interest rate options business developed at a steady pace. In Q3 2022, a total of 167 interest rate options transactions were concluded, totaling RMB23.872 billion, all of which were LPR interest rate cap/floor transactions. 2. The coupon rates of bonds generally declined, while bond issuances expanded with active trading of spot bonds The coupon rates of bonds generally declined. In September, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.70 percent, 4 basis points lower than that in June. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 2.86 percent, 9 basis points lower than the rate in June. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.01 percent, 16 basis points higher than the rateThe yield on government securities went down with expanded term spreads. At end-September, yields on 1-year, 3-year, 5-year, 7-year, and 10-year government securities decreased by 10 basis points, 12 basis points, 7 basis points, 8 basis points, and 6 basis points, to 1.85 percent, 2.33 percent, 2.58 percent, 2.76 percent, and 2.76 percent from end-June, respectively. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 91 basis points, expanding 4 basis points from end-June. Bond issuances increased year on year. In Q1–Q3 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 3.8 percent, or RMB1.7 trillion year on year to RMB46.8 trillion, driven mostly by surges in government bonds, financial bonds issued by the CDB, and policy financial bonds. At end-September, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB143.9 trillion, representing an increase of 12.3 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed a marked increase. In Q1–Q3 2022, the value of cash bond trading on the bond market posted RMB229.7 trillion, registering an increase of 31.1 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bond trading on the interbank market was RMB200.8 trillion, representing an increase of 29.6 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB28.9 trillion, an increase of 43 percent year on year.3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market generally decreased The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In Q1–Q3 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB20.4 trillion, rising 13.7 percent year on year. At end-Q3, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB17.0 trillion, increasing by 16.7 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances saw steady growth. At end-September, outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew by RMB2.0562 trillion and RMB399.5 billion compared to the beginning of 2022 and end-June, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 67.9 percent were issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with interest rates generally moving downward. In Q1–Q3 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB41.9 trillion, growing 19.9 percent year on year. At end-September, the balance of bill financing was RMB12.4 trillion, up 34.7 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.9 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 1 percentage point year on year. In Q1–Q3, the interest rates on the bill market generally went down.4. The stock market indices fell and the trading volume and amount of fundraising decreased year on year The stock market indices dropped. At end-September 2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,024 points, a decrease of 11 percent from end-June. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 10,779 points, a decrease of 16.4 percent from end-June. Turnover on the stock markets declined year on year. In Q1–Q3, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB174.1 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB956.4 billion, representing a decrease of 8.8 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets witnessed a slight dip year on year. In Q1–Q3, cumulative fundraising reached RMB989.9 billion, a decrease of 1.7 percent year on year. 5. Premium income increased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In Q1–Q3, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB3.8 trillion, up 4.9 percent year on year and an acceleration of 5.7 percentage points compared to that at end-2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB1.1 trillion, representing a year-on-year decrease of 1 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 1.7 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went down by 3.3 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-September, totalassets in the insurance sector increased 9.8 percent year on year to RMB26.7 trillion, an acceleration of 3 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 9.5 percent and investment-linked assets increased by 9.3 percent year on year.6. The turnover of spot foreign exchange transactions declined year on year In Q1–Q3 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD6.5 trillion, a decrease of 13.1 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD15.4 trillion, an increase of 5.3 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD10.1 trillion, accounting for 65.4 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD105.4 billion, an increase of 26.2 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD1.1 trillion, an increase of 6.3 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 55.2 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, while international gold prices declined At end-September 2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,671.75 per ounce, representing a decrease of 6.8 percent from end-2021. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB390.00 per gram, a decline of 4.3 percent from end-2021. In Q3 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 11,300 tons, representing growth of 43.8 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB4.34 trillion, representing growth of 47.5 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Opening up in the financial market Swap Connect between Mainland and Hong Kong made its debut. On July 4, the PBC, the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (HKSFC), and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) jointly announced the launch of mutual access between the Hong Kong and Mainland interest rate swap markets (Swap Connect). Swap Connect facilitated participation in the mainland RMB currency swap market by overseas investors and supported the financial opening-up at an elevated level. Bond Connect has operated smoothly and efficiently during the past five years. OnJuly 4, the PBC, HKSFC, and HKMA jointly hosted the fifth anniversary forum of Bond Connect and the launch of Swap Connect via video link. Since its inception in 2017, Bond Connect has been operating smoothly and efficiently and has been serving as a two-way bridge, marking a major milestone in deepening the opening-up of China’s financial markets. Moving forward, the PBC will continue to work with the HKMA, HKSFC, financial market infrastructure service providers, and market agencies to improve the relevant institutional arrangements, support the prosperity and development of Hong Kong as an international financial center, and promote the high-quality development and high-level opening-up of China’s financial market. 2. Institutional arrangements and reforms in the securities market The multi-level capital market system was improved. In July, approved by the CSRC, trading in futures and options based on the China Securities Index (CSI) 1000 Index kicked off on the China Financial Futures Exchange, further meeting investors’ demand for a haven and adding another ballast to market stability. In July, the CSRC launched a pilot program for in-kind share distributions to investors by private equity and venture capital funds, which improved the environment for private equity and venture capital funds to develop and bolster efforts to serve the real economy. The legitimate rights and interests of investors were further protected. In July, the CSRC and MOF jointly released the Provisions on Matters Regarding the Priority Use of Property of Violators of the Securities Law for Civil Compensation, The Provisions clarify the specific working mechanism whereby administrative fines paid by securities law violators shall be used to bear the liability for civil compensation, pioneering the application of prioritizing civil compensation liability in the securities sector. Cooperation on audit regulation was deepened between China and the US. In August, the CSRC, MOF, and the US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board signed an audit oversight cooperation agreement. The agreement set out specific arrangements for conducting inspections and investigations by each side over relevant accounting firms in accordance with the law, laying a foundation for equal and efficient cooperation during the next stage based on complying with each party’s respective laws and regulations. This will further enhance the audit quality of accounting firms and foster a sound international regulatory environment for companies’ pursuit of overseas listings in a lawful and compliant manner. The two-way opening-up forged ahead in the capital market. In July, the depository receipt business under the China-Switzerland Stock Connect was officially launched, expanding channels for two-way cross-border investments and financing, and deepening financial cooperation between China and Switzerland. In August, the trading calendar improvement program of the Shanghai–Hong Kong and Shenzhen–Hong Kong Stock Connect was kicked off for the purposes of improvingthe Stock Connect between the mainland and Hong Kong, enhancing the appeal of both capital markets, and consolidating Hong Kong’s position as an international financial center. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The mechanism for the capital replenishment of insurance companies was improved. In August, the PBC and CBIRC jointly released the Notice on Issues Concerning the Issuance of Undated Capital Bonds by Insurance Companies, allowing insurance companies to replenish core Tier 2 capital by issuing undated capital bonds, provided that the balance of such undated capital bonds does not exceed 30 percent of the insurance company’s core capital. The PBC regulates the overall balance of capital replenishment bonds, including undated capital bonds issued by the insurance companies. The above measures provide more channels for insurance companies to replenish capital and improve their core solvency adequacy level in a way that strengthens the capability of insurance companies to forestall and defuse risks and to serve the real economy, broaden the product range in the financial market, and optimize the structure of the financial system. Supervision over insurance asset management companies was strengthened. In August, the CBIRC revised and released the Rules on Insurance Asset Management Companies. The highlights of the Rules are as follow. First, a special chapter on corporate governance was added, clarifying the requirements on shareholders’ obligations, incentive and restraint mechanisms, the operation of the shareholders’ meeting and the board of directors and supervisors, and so on. Second, a special chapter was dedicated to risk management, laying out the risk management system, the risk management requirements, and the internal control auditing. Third, the equity structure was further optimized with the cap on holding foreign equity removed. Uniform and applicable conditions were clarified and set for all types of shareholders, and management of non-financial company shareholders was strictly enforced. Fourth, operating principles and relevant requirements were optimized. The business scope of insurance asset management companies was refined, adding clear requirements on the establishment of a trustee mechanism. The articles regarding asset independence and prohibition of debt offsetting were improved and channeling business was strictly prohibited. Fifth, new regulatory measures and constraints on non-compliance were introduced. Part 4 Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments As global inflation remains elevated, central banks in the major advanced economiescontinue their policy tightening amid the difficult trade-off between price stability and economic growth. This, coupled with disruptions due to geopolitical tensions, COVID-19, and energy and food crises, has given rise to a broad-based economic slowdown and financial market turmoil. Potential risks merit special attention. 1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies The momentum for economic growth remained under pressure. In the US, GDP grew in Q3 by 2.6 percent at an annualized pace, after contracting for two straight quarters. It remains to be seen whether or not this mild recovery can be sustained. The US Institute for Supply Management Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) fell to 50.2 in October, a new low since May 2020. The Consumer Sentiment Index remained low despite a rebound. The Office of Management and Budget revised downward its US growth forecast for this year from 3.8 percent to 1.4 percent. In the euro area, GDP grew by 2.1 percent in Q3 year on year, but the leading indicators fell. In October, the PMI for manufacturing and services dropped to a 29-month-low of 46.4 and a 20-month-low of 48.6, respectively. In the UK, GDP declined by 0.2 percent quarter on quarter in Q3, slipping back to negative territory since the first quarter of 2021. In Japan, GDP in Q3 contracted by 1.2 percent on an annualized basis. The Japanese government revised downward its growth forecast for the 2022 fiscal year to 2.0 percent from 2.4 percent. The IMF cut its global growth forecast for 2023 by 0.2 percentage points to 2.7 percent. Inflation remained elevated. In October, the US CPI was up by 7.7 percent year on year. It remained high despite a moderate decline from 8.2 percent in September. The core CPI rose by 6.3 percent year on year, edging down from the 6.6 percent in September. The HICP in the euro area rose by 10.7 percent over the prior year, another new high since records began. The CPI in the UK jumped by 11.1 percent compared with the previous year, an all-time high since the 1980s. In September, the increase in consumer prices in a number of emerging markets remained persistently high, rising by 7.4 percent, 7.2 percent, 6.4 percent, and 6 percent in India, Brazil, Thailand, and Indonesia, respectively. The CPI in both Argentina and Turkey surged by more than 80 percent. Labor supply is recovering slowly. On the one hand, insufficient and tight labor supply remains a main problem in the major advanced economies. In the US, job vacancies continued to grow by 437,000 over August to 10.72 million in September, exceeding 10 million for fifteen consecutive months. The unemployment rate was 3.7 percent in October, still close to a 50-year low. On the other hand, labor demand slowed marginally. Growth of US non-farm payrolls slowed to 261,000 in October ona seasonally-adjusted basis, their lowest since 2021. Going forward, performance of the unemployment rate, wage growth, and other labor market indicators will depend on the relative changes in labor supply and demand. Global financial markets witnessed large swings. In Q3, the persistently high inflation and the weakening economic outlook continued to depress major stock indices in the US and Europe. In particular, tech stocks, which earlier had performed well, saw a notable decline. The tax-slashing “mini-budget” announced by the former British government on September 23 spooked the market amid rising concerns about the fiscal balance, mounting inflationary pressures, and the liquidity squeeze on UK pension funds. The yield on the 30-year gilt once surged to an all-time high of 5 percent since 1998, and the British pound once collapsed to a historic low, trading near parity with the dollar. Market turmoil forced the Bank of England (BOE) to suspend the planned start of its gilt selling and to temporarily begin buying long-dated UK government bonds, as announced on September 28th. In the meantime, driven by risk aversion and other factors, the US dollar strengthened markedly. The US Dollar Index rose above 114, the euro fluctuated around its parity against the US dollar, and the Japanese yen depreciated to 140 yen per dollar in September and further to 150 yen per dollar in October. The Japanese government intervened in the foreign exchange market for the first time in 24 years after the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis. In the bond market, the 10-year Treasury yield was close to 4 percent in late September, and it rose to above 4.2 percent in late October, while the yield on 10-year government bonds in the UK, France, and Germany all jumped above 2 percent in Q3. Oil prices dropped notably from their elevated levels, with the Brent futures falling by 21.6 percent in Q3.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major advanced economies continued with their policy tightening. The Federal Reserve (Fed) hiked the federal funds rate in July, September, and November, each by 75 basis points (bps), to a target range of 3.75–4 percent. In its September dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2022 was 4.25–4.5 percent, which means a total hike of 425 bps this year, way higher than the forecast in the June dot plot. After the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met in November, Fed Chair Powell noted that the ultimate level of interest rates would be higher than previously expected, but in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, the Fed will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation. In addition, beginning in June the Fed began to reduce the size of its balance sheet. In September, the Fed increased the monthly cap for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to USD60 billion and USD35 billion, respectively. The European Central Bank increased the interest rate on its main refinancing operations, marginal lending facility, and deposit facility each by 50 bps in July, its first rate hike in eleven years. It then raised the three key interest rates again in September and October, each by 75 bps to 2 percent, 2.25 percent, and 1.5 percent, respectively. In the meantime, it created the Transmission Protection Instrument to ensure smooth transmission of monetary policy across the euro area so as to meet the objective of maintaining price stability. The BOE raised the Bank Rate in August and September, each by 50 bps. It also decided to reduce its total gilt holdings by GBP80 billion over a 12-month period. However, market turmoil at the end of September forced the BOE to suspend bond selling and to conduct temporary bond-buying operations. The planned bond selling was resumed on November 1st. The Bank of Japan maintained a loose monetary policy and the yield curve control. It kept the 10-year government bond yield near zero and would continue to buy 10-year government bonds at 0.25 percent every business day. In September, for the first timein years the Bank of Japan intervened in the foreign exchange market to stem the fall of the yen. Among the other central banks, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Bank of Korea raised rates by a total of 175 bps, 150 bps, 100 bps, and 75 bps, respectively. Some emerging economies continued to raise interest rates. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the spillovers from monetary policy tightening in the advanced economies, some emerging economies continued with their rate hikes. In Q3, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas hiked the rate three times, by a total of 175 bps. The central banks in South Africa, Mexico, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand all increased their rates twice by a total of 150 bps, 150 bps, 100 bps, 75 bps, 50 bps, and 50 bps, respectively. For Indonesia and Thailand, it was their first rate hike after the outbreak of COVID-19. The Central Bank of Brazil raised the rate once by 50 bps. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention High inflation remains a grim challenge. Inflation keeps hitting record highs in the advanced economies. There is a sign of a marginal decline in the US CPI, but the easing of its core CPI has been limited. As rent, transportation, recreation, and other items in the CPI basket may still create upward pressures on prices, US inflation remains sticky. Studies have shown that calculated on a comparable basis, the peaks in US inflation this time around are close to those during the Great Inflation of the 1970s and 1980s. Other advanced economies have not yet seen any signs of falling inflation. Furthermore, in some Asian emerging economies where inflation has remained subdued, prices are increasing at a faster pace. Therefore, global inflation is likely to remain high in the short run. The implications of high inflation for global economic activities will play out over time. It may hamper an economic recovery and widen the gap between the rich and the poor. In addition, the effectiveness of simply counting on monetary policy to contain inflation has become a key challenge for the advanced economies. Policy synergy among fiscal policy, structural reforms, international coordination, and open trade is urgently needed more than ever to make improvements on the supply side. Policymakers should be on high alert to the risk of a broader recession. Since the beginning of the year, the global economy has been under persistent pressure from the monetary policy tightening of the advanced economies, geopolitical tensions, energy shortages, and high inflation. The cumulative tightening effects may be larger than expected. Historically, the US experienced seven rate hike cycles since the late 1970s, and the US economy headed into recession during five of them, either when the Fed was still raising the rate or after it finished the rate hikes. Many international organizations have already revised downward their global growth forecasts for 2022 and 2023. The IMF predicted that 31 economies, or 43 percent of the 72 economieswith a quarterly growth forecast, would enter a technical recession this year and next. These economies combined account for one-third of global GDP. Potential risks from growing financial vulnerabilities should not be overlooked. On the one hand, tighter liquidity has amplified financial market adjustments. Rate hikes by the major advanced economies, coupled with a stronger dollar, have increased the volatility of overseas asset prices. There is a liquidity squeeze on government bond markets in the advanced economies, and home prices have shown signs of a retreat. Non-bank financial institutions, such as pension funds, insurance firms, hedge funds, and in particular financially vulnerable market players, are feeling increasing pressures. On the other hand, risk aversion has increased the volatility of cross-border capital flows. As capital flows back to the US and other major advanced economies, capital outflows come under mounting pressures in other economies, particularly the emerging economies. Those with elevated levels of external debt are facing bigger debt servicing burdens. The risk of uncertainties in global financial markets has increased markedly. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In the first three quarters of 2022, in the face of the complicated and serious international situation and the impact of multiple factors exceeding expectations, pandemic containment and economic and social development in all regions and departments across the country were coordinated in an effective way, with an acceleration in the implementation of a package of policy measures and follow-up measures. China’s economy withstood the downward pressures and continued to rebound. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in the first three quarters stood at RMB87.0269 trillion, growing by 3.0 percent year on year on a comparable basis, an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points from H1. 1. Consumption improved, investments remained stable with a moderate increase, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth. The increase in residents’ income kept pace with economic growth, and consumption improved. In the first three quarters, the country’s per capita disposable income reached RMB27650, an increase of 5.3 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 3.2 percent in real terms. The growth of rural residents’ income outpaced that of urban residents’, and the structure of income distribution continuously improved. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q3, 22.8 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” down 1.0 percentage point from Q2. In the first three quarters, total retail sales of consumer goods grew by 0.7 percent year on year, and the growth rate moved from negative to positive. Consumption of basicliving items saw sound growth and retail sales of grain, oil, food, and beverages by enterprises (units) above the designated size increased by 9.1 percent and 6.9 percent, respectively. Investments remained stable and saw a moderate increase, and the structure continued to improve. In the first three quarters, national fixed-asset investments (excluding those by rural households) increased by 5.9 percent year on year to RMB42.1412 trillion. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 10.1 percent, 4.2 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure increased by 8.6 percent, 2.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in real estate decreased by 8.0 percent. Investments in high-tech industry grew by 20.2 percent year on year, 14.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Social investments grew by 13.2 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in health and education grew by 31.2 percent and 8.1 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports grew rapidly. In the first three quarters, imports and exports of goods grew by 9.9 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 13.8 percent year on year and imports grew by 5.2 percent year on year, with the surplus of trade in goods posting RMB4.23 trillion, up by 53.7 percent year on year. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share of imports and exports under general trade increasing by 2.1 percentage points year on year and accounting for 64.0 percent of the total imports and exports. Exports of machinery and electronics and labor-intensive products increased by 10.0 percent and 12.7 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 56.8 percent and 18 percent of total imports and exports. Our trading partners are becoming more diversified. Imports from and exports to countries along the Belt and Road and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) trading partners grew by 20.7 percent and 15.2 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In the first three quarters, actually utilized FDI increased by 15.6 percent year on year to RMB1.00376 trillion (equivalent to USD153.3 billion, representing growth of 18.9 percent year on year). In terms of sectors, FDI in the high-tech industry and the services industry grew rapidly. In the first three quarters, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 32.3 percent year on year. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 48.6 percent year on year and actually utilized FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 27.9 percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the services industry grew by 6.7 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production was stable, industrial production recovered rapidly, and the service industry continued to recoverIn the first three quarters, the value-added of the primary industry totaled RMB5.4779 trillion, up 4.2 percent year on year, and the value-added of the secondary industry totaled RMB35.0189 trillion, up 3.9 percent year on year, and the value-added of the tertiary industry totaled RMB46.53 trillion, up 2.3 percent year on year. Agricultural production was favorable, and animal husbandry grew steadily. In the first three quarters, the value-added of agriculture (farming) increased by 3.8 percent year on year. The output of summer grains totaled 175.53 million tons, up 1.55 million tons from 2021, increasing by 0.9 percent year on year. The sowing area of autumn grains was stable with a slight rise, and a bumper harvest was expected. In the first three quarters, output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 4.4 percent year on year; in particular, output of pork grew by 5.9 percent year on year. At end-Q3, the number of hogs in stock increased by 1.4 percent year on year. The recovery of industrial production was accelerated, with the equipment manufacturing and high-tech manufacturing industries developing rapidly. In the first three quarters, the value-added of industrial enterprises above a designated size (IEDS) increased by 3.9 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points from H1. Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 8.5 percent year on year. The manufacturing sector increased by 3.2 percent year on year. The electricity, heat, gas and water production and supply sectors increased by 5.6 percent year on year. The industrial structure was continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and equipment manufacturing sector increased by 8.5 percent and 6.3 percent year on year, respectively, 4.6 percentage points and 2.4 percentage points higher than the growth of the value-added of IEDS. The output of new energy cars and solar batteries grew by 112.5 percent and 33.7 percent year on year, respectively. The service industry continued to recover, and growth of the modern service industry was favorable. In the first three quarters, the value-added of the services industry grew by 2.3 percent year on year. Specifically, the value-added of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services and the financial sector grew by 8.8 percent and 5.5 percent year on year, respectively. In Q3, the value-added of the services industry grew by 3.2 percent year on year, changing from negative to positive. In the first three quarters, the Index of Service Production (ISP) increased by 0.1 percent year on year. In particular, the ISP increased by 1.3 percent year on year in September. The Business Activities Expectation Index for the service industry reached 48.9 percent. Specifically, the Business Activities Index for postal services, telecommunications/broadcasting/television and satellite transmission services, and monetary and financial services were all within a prosperous rangeabove 60.0 percent. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and the growth of producer prices continued to decelerate Consumer prices increased moderately. In the first three quarters, the CPI increased by 2.0 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.3 percentage points from H1. The core CPI (food and energy excluded) increased by 0.9 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.1 percentage points from H1. Specifically, the CPI in July, August, and September increased by 2.7 percent, 2.5 percent, and 2.8 percent, respectively. Pork prices have been in an uptrend, increasing by 26.2 percent year on year in Q3 and driving up food prices by 7.1 percent year on year, an acceleration of 4.7 percent from Q2. The drop in the prices of raw materials, associated with the suppression of demand due to COVID-19, led to a deceleration in the growth of non-food prices. In Q3, non-food prices increased by 1.7 percent year on year, declining by 0.6 percentage points from Q2. The growth of producer prices continued to decelerate. In the first three quarters, the producer price index (PPI) increased by 5.9 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1.8 percentage points from H1. Specifically, the PPI in July, August, and September increased by 4.2 percent, 2.3 percent, and 0.9 percent, respectively. Due to the drop in international crude oil prices and other commodity prices associated with the base effects, the year-on-year increase in the PPI decreased month by month. In the first three quarters, the purchasing price index for industrial products (PPIRM) increased by 8.3 percent year on year, a deceleration of 2.1 percentage points from H1. In the first three quarters, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC increased by 4.7 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1.2 percentage points from H1 and a deceleration of 1.7 percentage points from the same period of last year. 4. Fiscal revenue stabilized and rebounded, and the effects of support for stabilizing the economy and ensuring the people’s livelihood have emerged In the first three quarters, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB15.3 trillion, increasing by 4.1 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), and decreasing by 6.6 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 3.0 percent and 5.2 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), respectively, and decreased by 8.6 percent and 4.9 percent (calculated on a natural basis), respectively. Tax revenue posted RMB12.4 trillion, an increase of 1.0 percent (VAT credit refund excluded). In the first three quarters, expenditures in the national general budget posted RMB19.0 trillion, increasing by 6.2 percent year on year and accelerating by 3.9percentage points from the same period of the previous year. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures related to science and technology and health grew quickly, increasing by 14 percent and 10.7 percent, respectively. 5. The employment situation was generally stable The surveyed urban unemployment rate fell. In the first three quarters, the national surveyed urban unemployment rate averaged 5.6 percent. In Q3, the national surveyed urban unemployment rate was 5.4 percent, decreasing by 0.4 percentage points from Q2. In September, the national surveyed urban unemployment rate was 5.5 percent, an increase of 0.2 percentage points from the previous month. Specifically, the surveyed unemployment rate among 25- to 59-year-olds was 4.7 percent, 0.8 percentage points lower than the national surveyed urban unemployment rate. In September, the unemployment rate among 16- to 24-year-olds was 17.9 percent, two percentage points lower than the peak in July, dropping for two consecutive months. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in China’s balance of payments. According to preliminary statistics, in the first three quarters, China’s current account surplus registered USD310.4 billion, an increase of 56 percent and accounting for 2.4 percent of GDP. Specifically, according to the balance of payments statistics, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD521.6 billion, an all-time record, and it increased by 37 percent year on year. Trade in services recorded a deficit of USD65.6 billion, down 23 percent year on year. Cross-border capital flows maintained a basic equilibrium. Specifically, direct investments recorded a surplus of USD46.9 billion. By the end of June, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.6360 trillion, with medium- and long-term foreign debt accounting for 46 percent. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In September 2022, among 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 2.3 percent and 3.5 percent year on year, respectively, down 1 percentage point and 0.8 percentage points respectively from June. In the first three quarters of 2022, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 22.2 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 26.3 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development fell by 8 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development fell by 7.5 percent year on year.At end-September 2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 3.2 percent year on year to RMB53.3 trillion. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 4.1 percent year on year to RMB38.9 trillion. Outstanding housing development loans dropped by 1.1 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion. 7.2 The online retail industry In recent years, driven by sci-tech innovation and consumption upgrades, online retail began to thrive upon further utilization of the Internet, cloud computing, and artificial intelligence. This propelled traditional retail businesses to accelerate their digital transition. In the midst of the pandemic, the development of online retail proved to be resilient, which helped unleash its potential and promote the sustained recovery of consumption. In 2021, the online sales of the top 100 chain retailers in China reached RMB470 billion, accounting for 20.6 percent of their total sales. In the first three quarters of 2022, online retail sales in China posted RMB9.59 trillion, up 4 percent year on year and 3.3 percentage points higher than the total retail sales of consumer goods during the same period; online retail sales of physical goods posted RMB8.24 trillion, up 6.1 percent year on year, constituting 25.7 percent of total retail sales of consumer goods, which were 2.1 percentage points higher than their share during the same period of last year; online retail sales of physical goods, food, clothing and other necessities grew by 15.6 percent, 4.7 percent, and 5.2 percent year on year, respectively. The online retail industry maintained steady growth, demonstrating strong resilience and new trends. First, live-streaming e-commerce flourished. In H1 2022, according to the monitoring of business big data, over 60 million live-streamings tookplace on major e-commerce platforms in China, receiving more than 517 billion views. Second, Guochao (a Chinese brand fad) encouraged new consumption. Spurred on by cultural confidence and consumption upgrading, both traditional and newly created Chinese local brands led consumer trends. In H1 2022, Chinese local brands held a high market share of 68.8 percent, and nine out of the top ten brands with the highest online sales were Chinese local brands. Third, sales of upgraded consumption goods continued to grow at a fast pace. Major e-commerce platforms and businesses actively replaced the older generations of products with new ones, featuring growing demand for glamping items, winter sports, and green household appliances. In H1 2022, the sales of jewelry and skiing equipment increased by 39 percent and 72.7 percent year on year, respectively; the sales of energy-saving central air-conditioning, energy-saving freezers, and energy-saving water heaters rose by 124 percent, 33.8 percent, and 27.2 percent year on year, respectively. Fourth, new industries and new business forms mushroomed in rural areas. As e-commerce and logistics distribution penetrated the rural areas, rural e-commerce systems continued to improve, with more than 30,000 agriculture-related e-commerce businesses operating in China. In the first three quarters of 2022, online retail sales in rural areas totaled RMB1.49785 trillion, up 3.6 percent year on year; online retail sales of agricultural products reached RMB374.51 billion, up 8.8 percent year on year. Driven by constant improvements in the market environment and growing personalized demand, new models and new business forms of consumption, characterized by the integration of online and offline channels, developed at a faster pace, bringing both opportunities and challenges to the online retail industry. Moving forward, following the requirements in the 14th Five-Year Plan for E-Commerce Development, the relevant parties should make synergistic efforts to break through the bottlenecks that restrict consumption and promote high-quality development of the industry in the following respects:. The first is to promote the development of smart retail. Traditional retailers are encouraged to engage in online retail via their own platforms or via third-party platforms so as to augment the brand effect and product value. The second is to accelerate the upgrading of business infrastructure toward intelligence. The digitized supply chain must be improved with higher delivery efficiency. Adopting demand-oriented approaches, resources are to be channeled more rapidly into new consumption scenarios, such as instant retail, contactless consumption, and live streaming retail. The third is to enhance the application of technology and innovations in business forms and models. Technologies including artificial intelligence, big data, and the Internet of Things should be fully tapped into in a way that guides production factors into new business forms and models. The fourth is to improve the business environment in a continuous manner. Protection of users’ privacy and workers’ legitimate rights and interests needs to be strengthened as does the evaluation system for new consumption businesses, the protection of intellectual property rights, and the construction of supporting systems. In the online retail market, a fair, impartial, and open environment for competition should be formed to boost new consumption.Part 5 Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy In Q3, the Chinese economy rebounded significantly, showing an overall trend of recovery and positive outlook. In Q3, China’s GDP registered year-on-year growth of 3.9 percent, 3.5 percentage points higher than that in Q2. The benefits of a package of policies and follow-up measures for stabilizing the economy were continuously unleashed. Agricultural production remained stable, and autumn grain production was expected to witness a bumper harvest. Industrial production bounced back swiftly, with market confidence enhanced. Household income growth was in line with economic growth, and consumption expenditures were recovering, with sound growth of sales in upgraded green products such as new energy automobiles. Business investment activities were overall improved and construction of major projects was accelerated. External trade maintained rapid growth, as net exports of goods and services contributed 1.1 percentage points to economic growth in Q3, making positive contribution to stabilizing the macro economy. Employment was generally stable, the average urban surveyed unemployment rate in Q3 dropped by 0.4 percentage points from the previous quarter. The capacity to ensure energy supply was constantly enhanced, while the proportion of non-fossil energy consumption was continuously elevated. Meanwhile, it should be noted that the current external environment has become more severe and complicated, with elevated overseas inflation and increasing risks of a global economic downturn, and the foundation for domestic economic recovery is not solid yet. On the one hand, inflation in the advanced economies remains sticky, and their tightening monetary policy stance may continue for the short run. As the momentum of global economic recovery weakens, the IMF has recently again lowered its 2023 global economic growth forecast by 0.2 percentage points to 2.7 percent. On the other hand, consumption recovery is constrained by the increase in precautionary savings by domestic households, and effective investment expansions are facing multiple constraints such as insufficient returns, while medium- and long-term challenges such as the aging of the population and the low-carbon transition cannot be neglected. However, it should be noted that factors and conditions for establishing a new development paradigm are sufficient, with a recovery of effective demand gaining momentum, and the economy being resilient, promising, and energetic. The fundamentals for China’s sound economic growth over the long run remain unchanged. We should maintain a strategic focus and concentrate on accomplishing our own tasks. We need to comprehensively implement the requirements for “preventing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and ensuringsafe development,” and well coordinate pandemic containment and socio-economic development. We need to make sure that the package of policies and follow-up measures to stabilize the economy will be well implemented and will take effect so as to vigorously promote high-quality development. Price increases are generally moderate, but we should be alert to pressures from a rebounding of inflation. In Q3, pork, vegetables, and other food prices increased rather rapidly, while prices of travel, accommodations, and other services affected by Covid-19 experienced a lower increase than in previous years, leading to a mild rise in the overall CPI. Meanwhile, as prices of commodities, such as international crude oil decreased amid fluctuations, growth of the PPI continued to decrease and in October fell into negative territory on a year-on-year basis. The PPI increase is expected to remain at a low level during the year. Looking to the future, aggregate supply and demand are generally balanced in the Chinese economy, monetary policy remains sound, industrial and supply chains are operating smoothly, and household inflation expectations are stable, providing favorable conditions for maintaining generally stable price levels. In the meantime, we should pay close attention to the possibility of rising inflation in the future. At present, geopolitical conflicts are still disrupting global energy supplies and high inflation in advanced economies remains sticky. Therefore, external pressures of imported inflation still exist. For a period of time, M2 growth has remained relatively elevated in China. If aggregate demand recovers further, this could lead to a lagged effect. In winter, vigorous demand for pork and heating, the shifting calendar date of the Spring Festival, and other factors, especially more precise pandemic containment measures, could swiftly unleash consumption momentum and increase short-run structural inflationary pressures. We should keep a close eye on price movements, strengthen monitoring and analysis, and be alert to prospective pressures of a rebound of inflation. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will follow the guidelines of the 20th CPC National Congress, make efforts to build a high-level socialist market economy, and press ahead with Chinese-style modernization. Following the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will pursue progress while taking stability as its top priority. The PBC will deepen the financial system reform and develop a modern central banking system. With solid implementation of policies, it will aim to maintain employment and price stability and it will leverage the key role of effective investments so as to consolidate and amplify economic momentum upwards, and effectively upgrade and appropriately expand the economic output.The PBC will strengthen implementation of a sound monetary policy. With proper intertemporal adjustments, it will balance short-term and long-term perspectives, economic growth and price stability, as well as internal and external equilibria. It will resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies, and it will not provide an excessive money supply. With these efforts, the PBC will provide stronger and higher-quality support for the real economy. While keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, the PBC will guide policy and development banks to make full and effective use of the policy-based and development-orientedfinancial instruments as well as the newly added RMB800 billion of credit lines. Encouraging commercial banks to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth of M2 and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) so as to achieve better economic performance. Paying high attention to the potential rise in inflation, especially demand-side changes, the PBC will continue its efforts to consolidate favorable conditions for stable and growing domestic grain production and for the smooth functioning of the energy market. With proper preparations and management, it will keep prices basically stable. It will render more support to key areas, weak links, as well as to those businesses and industries that have been hard hit by COVID-19, by making good use of the inclusive MSB lending facilities, the carbon emissions reduction facility (CERF), as well as central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use, for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, for transportation and logistics, and for equipment upgrading and renovation. The PBC will ensure solid implementation of the long-term mechanism for boosting the confidence, willingness, capacity, and professionalism of financial institutions to lend to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and private businesses so as to spur the vitality of market entities. It will continue its efforts to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform and to optimize the central bank policy rate system. The mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates will play a key role and it will contribute to stabilizing the liability costs for banks. The costs for corporate financing and for consumer credit are expected to drop, with the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuing to unleash its potential. The PBC will pay close attention to economic developments in the developed economies as well as to the spillover effects of their monetary policy shifts, and it will focus on domestic issues while properly balancing internal and external equilibria. Pursuing a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies and upholding the decisive role of the market in exchange rate formation, the PBC will maintain bottom-line thinking and strengthen expectation management so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will coordinate efforts for economic development and risk prevention to maintain overall stability in the financial system. It will establish and improve the mechanism for risk prevention, early warning, and resolution, and it will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur so as to safeguard the interests of the people.First, the PBC will maintain stable and appropriate growth in money and credit. By using a mix of monetary policy tools, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and maintain reasonable growth in money supply and the AFRE, striving to create a favorable liquidity environment for consolidating the economic recovery and maintaining the stable functioning of the market at year-end. Closely following economic and financial developments both at home and abroad as well as changes in the monetary policy stances of the major economies, it will make in-depth analyses of liquidity supply and demand and financial market developments, and it will conduct open market operations (OMOs) in a flexible manner so as to improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of the operations, to stabilize market expectations and to properly balance internal and external equilibria. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, continue to ease liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on the supply of bank credits, and guide financial institutions to step up credit support for the real economy in line with market-oriented and law-based principles. With policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments in place and the newly increased RMB800 billion quota of credit put into use, financing support will be directed toward infrastructure construction. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment by replenishing capital of commercial banks through multiple channels and ramping up support for small and medium-sized banks in their issuance of perpetual bonds and other capital replenishment instruments, thereby improving the capacity of banks to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will use structural monetary policy tools in a focused, reasonable, appropriate, and flexible manner. It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable and it will continue to provide inclusive and sustainable funding support to agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private businesses. It will push for better implementation of the inclusive MSB lending facilities and maintain financial support for MSBs so that they can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and securing employment. At the same time, the PBC will put into operation the CERF and the special central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use in support of carbon emissions reduction in a scientific and orderly manner. It will encourage eligible financial institutions to provide funding at preferential interest rates to key projects that significantly reduce carbon emissions, and it will guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development based on market principles. Moreover, the PBC will support clean and efficient use of coal and coal-fired power. It will promote the transition to a green and low-carbon economy on the basis of security in the supply of energy so as to help achieve the goals of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality by scientific and well-ordered steps. The PBC will continue to implement the special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for transportation and logistics, and it will pick up pace inimplementing the special central bank lending for equipment upgrading and renovation, leveraging the role of the special central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. More work will be done to concretely implement those financial policies that have already been introduced. The PBC will continue to encourage financial institutions to defer interest and principal payments for qualified loans and it will assess the effectiveness of the MSB credit policy orientation. It will urge and guide financial institutions to accelerate the establishment of the long-term mechanism for boosting the confidence, willingness, capacity, and professionalism of financial institutions to lend to MSBs so as to improve and facilitate MSB access to financing. Aiming at promoting rural revitalization on all fronts, the PBC will guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, promote innovations in financial products and services, and effectively ramp up financial support for the agricultural sector, rural areas, and farmers. The PBC will adopt a mix of policy measures to enhance the role of policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments in speeding up construction and in ensuring payments for key projects, with follow-up funding support put in place. With these efforts, more projects are expected to deliver concrete progress. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance. Meanwhile, it will adopt city-specific measures and use the policy toolkit fully and effectively to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions. The special lending facility to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects will be put in place at a quickened pace and policy strength will be increased as appropriate. Commercial banks will also be guided to provide follow-up funding support. The PBC will protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers and promote the stable and healthy development of the real estate market. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms, and it will focus on domestic conditions while balancing internal and external equilibria. It will continue to improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and the central bank policy rate system. It will strengthen regulation of deposit rates and give full play to the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments to stabilize bank liability costs. Moreover, it will continue to tap into the LPR reform to help bring down the overall financing costs for businesses and the consumer credit costs for individuals. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve themanaged floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. Sticking to the decisive role of the market in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, the PBC will also enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, strengthen expectation management, and uphold bottom-line thinking, while conducting monitoring and analysis of cross-border capital flows and stressing risk prevention. By doing so, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and give play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. In addition, the PBC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market. Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. Moreover, the PBC will continue to advance RMB internationalization in an orderly manner by further expanding use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepening international monetary cooperation, and promoting the development of offshore RMB markets. It will run pilot programs for a high-level opening-up of cross-border investment and trade, further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account. Fifth, the PBC will make continued efforts to deepen the financial reform and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. The reform of development and policy financial institutions will move ahead, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities so as to better play their roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBC will strive to improve the legal system for the bond market and consolidate the legal basis for corporate credit bonds. Moreover, the PBC will accelerate the setting up of a multi-tiered bond market system, continue to expand the pilot program for financial bond balance management and macro-prudential management, and promote development of the over-the-counter (OTC) bond market in a bid to provide small and medium-sized financial institutions with diversified channels for bond investment transactions, custody, settlement, etc., and to increase bond market liquidity. The PBC will work to improve the bond underwriting and market-making mechanism, enhance the interconnectivity between the primary and secondary markets, and boost the effectiveness and transmission efficiency of bond pricing. Adhering to market principles and the rule of law, it will continue to adopt a zero-tolerance approach by stepping up efforts to crack down on illegal and irregular conduct in the bond market. At the same time, the PBC will remain firmly committed to advancing the opening-up of the bond market. Sixth, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC will strengthen the financial legal system. With the drafting of the Law on Financial Stability and the establishment of the Financial Stability Fund, it will further improve and consolidate the long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution, aiming to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is based on market principles and the rule of law. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential policy framework as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning and to enrich the macro-prudential policy tools. The PBC will improve regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will urge systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. At the same time, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve their total loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention ability. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate financial holding companies, and the relevant regulatory system will be continuously enhanced. The PBC will move ahead steadily to implement the requirement that non-financial enterprises which fall under the prescribed circumstances should apply for the establishment of financial holding companies according to the law so as to promote the sound, well-regulated, and sustainable development of financial holding companies. The PBC will go to great lengths to improve the effectiveness of regulation, reinforce prudential regulation, and conduct regulation of the financial sector on an on-going basis and strengthen protection of consumers and investors. Furthermore, the PBC will keep a close watch on risks in key fields. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it will attach importance to preventing and defusing financial risks in order to reduce existing risks and strictly guard against emerging risks. Additionally, the PBC will further tap into the functions of deposit insurance for early corrections and risk resolution, leverage the role of risk-differentiated premiums as both incentives and restraints, and enhance the authority of early corrections. Continued efforts will be made to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement corresponding measures. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards. It will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. Part 1 Money and Credit Analysis In 2022, the Chinese economy was hit by multiple unexpected factors, including COVID-19 and developments in the international situation. To be specific, pressures of shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakening expectations evolved, international geopolitical conflicts escalated, and the downside risks to the world economy increased, increasing uncertainties in the development environment. Against this backdrop, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and implemented the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. It placed stable growth in a more prominent position, strengthened implementation of a sound monetary policy, and gave full play to the guiding role of structural monetary policy instruments. As a result, money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) witnessed reasonable growth, the credit structure was improved continuously, and overall financing costs steadily declined, providing vigorous support for stabilizing the macro economy and creating a favorable economic and financial environment for the convening of 20th CPC National Congress. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level In 2022, the PBOC adopted a monetary policy prioritizing stability while pursuing development, and it took prompt measures at an early stage based on the dynamics of the macro situation. It employed a mix of instruments, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs) to inject liquidity into the economy. The PBOC cut the RRR by 0.25 percentage points in April and December, respectively, releasing a total of over RMB1 trillion in long-term liquidity. It turned over RMB1.13 trillion in surplus profits to the central budget, providing additional available funds equivalent to a sweeping RRR cut of 0.5 percentage points to the economy. The PBOC also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner, and it brought down interest rates in the money market, creating a favorable liquidity environment for keeping economic performance within a reasonable range. At end-2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 2.0 percent, indicating that liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level.Box 1 The PBOC Turns Over Surplus Profits to Facilitate Stable Growth In 2022, following the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBOC turned over RMB1.13 trillion in surplus profits to the central budget in accordance with the law, which were primarily used for tax refunds and transfer payments to local governments, thus providing relief to businesses, stabilizing employment, and protecting the people’s livelihood. These funds played an important role in stabilizing the macro economy. The PBOC made proper profits and transferred them to the central budget to enhance financial support for high-quality development, which can mainly be attributable to a sound monetary policy and a prudential financial budget system. In recent years, China has adhered to a sound monetary policy and it has maintained adequate room for policy maneuvers, making it possible for the PBOC to make stable profits. Currently, its profits mainly come from operational revenue by investing foreign exchange reserves in international financial markets in a market-based manner. The PBOC has pursued a sound monetary policy which seeks progress while giving top priority to stability and avoiding great volatility. As a result, its balance sheet has remained basically stable, with interest rate revenues and expenditures of monetary policy operations balanced, making it possible for the PBOC to make stable profits. In contrast, some major central banks across the globe have purchased large quantities of government bonds in response to the shocks of COVID-19, remarkably expanding their balance sheets. Under these circumstances,the surging interest rates will have implications for the balance sheets of the central banks and their financial conditions. After writing off historical costs, the PBOC turned over all surplus profits to the central budget in accordance with the law in 2022. Disclosure of this move demonstrated great improvement in financial transparency. The PBOC bore the costs of financial institutional reforms, such as the joint-stock reforms of state-owned commercial banks and rural credit cooperatives, which should be written off from its revenues. Over the past ten-odd years, it has been committed to absorbing these historical costs with part of its profits, and in most years it has turned over profits to the central budget. After years of unremitting efforts, the PBOC managed to write off all historical costs before turning over all surplus profits to the central budget in accordance with the law. This manifested coordination between monetary and fiscal policies to stabilize the macro economy, while announcement of the move demonstrated material improvements in the financial transparency of the PBOC as a modern central bank, which is conducive to cementing a financial foundation for a modern central bank system. In the process of turning over profits, the PBOC has maintained a sound and sustainable balance sheet, so the move will result neither in a government overdraft nor monetization of fiscal deficits. Instead of seeking maximum profits, a central bank is mandated to keep currency stable and to maintain financial stability so as to serve the public interest. A sound and sustainable balance sheet is the cornerstone of a central bank’s implementation of a monetary policy, maintaining financial stability, and enhancing financial services. It will not only make it credible that a central bank can keep currency stable and inflation under control, but also it will ensure that the bank can function as the “lender of last resort” and firmly support the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. In the next stage, the PBOC will, following the guidelines of the 20th CPC National Congress, establish a central bank system with Chinese characteristics, push forward the independent financial- budget management system, continuously improve accounting standards, replenish central bank reserves and capital, and implement a prudential asset loss provision system so as to ensure a sound and sustainable balance sheet. With these efforts, the PBOC can fulfill its missions in accordance with the law, keep currency stable, and maintain financial stability, thereby promoting full employment and economic growth. II. Lending by financial institutions grew rapidly, and lending rates remained at historic lows. Credit support for the real economy was strengthened. Since the beginning of Q2, due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the downward pressures on the economy,enterprises, especially micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), have been faced with increasing difficulties in business operations. For a period of time, their demands for credit waned and the growth of loans slowed down. In response, the PBOC has successively held a number of symposia to analyze the monetary and credit situations, attended by the heads of major financial institutions, the PBOC branches at various levels and its affiliated institutions as well as policy banks. Financial institutions, especially large state-owned commercial banks as well as policy and development banks, were urged to play a pillar role and to increase lending based on prudent operations and in line with market-based principles. In the second half of 2022, with the implementation of a package of policy measures to stabilize the economy and with the optimization of pandemic containment measures, credit demand improved marginally. The PBOC has guided policy and development banks to launch policy-backed and development-oriented financial instruments in the amount of RMB739.9 billion, making effective use of the newly increased credit line of RMB800 billion. Financial institutions were encouraged to extend credit with reasonable intensity and at an appropriate pace in line with market-based principles so as to consolidate credit support for the real economy. Throughout the year, RMB loans witnessed larger year-on-year growth and financial support continued to increase. At end-2022, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 10.4 percent year on year to RMB219.1 trillion, increasing RMB20.6 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB496.9 billion. Outstanding RMB loans grew 11.1 percent year on year to RMB214.0 trillion, up RMB21.3 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB1.4 trillion. Loans grew by RMB8.3 trillion, RMB5.3 trillion, RMB4.4 trillion, and RMB3.2 trillion in each of the four quarters of 2022, respectively. The quarterly increments accounted for 39.1 percent, 25.1 percent, 20.7 percent, and 15.1 percent, respectively, which were basically flat with those in the previous year. The credit structure has been improving. At end-2022, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB11.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022, accounting for 64.7 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year (YOY) growth rate of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 36.7 percent, 25.6 percentage points higher than that of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 23.8 percent year on year, 12.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total loans; 56.52 million MSBs were supported, a rise of 26.8 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rate of loans hit a statistical low. The PBOC continuously deepened the market-oriented interest rate reform, tapping into the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and bringing into play the key role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates so as to further bring down the actual lending rates. In December 2022, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.65 percent and 4.30 percent, respectively, down 0.15 percentage points and 0.35 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. In December, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.14 percent, down 0.62 percentage points year on year.In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.57 percent, down 0.62 percentage points year on year, while the weighted average interest rate on corporate loans fell by 0.60 percentage points year on year to 3.97 percent.In December, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 56.21 percent, 5.52 percent, and 38.27 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In December 2022, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 1.20 percent and 3.66 percent, respectively, up 1.1 and 3.35 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six months registered 5.03 percent and 4.99 percent, up 3.92 and 3.88 percentage points from December 2021, respectively.Deposits grew significantly. At end-2022, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies at all financial institutions increased 10.8 percent year on year to RMB264.4 trillion, up RMB25.9 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB5.6 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 11.3 percent year on year to RMB258.5 trillion, an increase of RMB26.3 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB6.6 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD853.9 billion, USD143.0 billion less than that at the beginning of 2022. The decrease was USD250.7 billion more as compared with the previous year.III. Money supply and the AFRE grew at a reasonable pace Money and credit aggregates grew at a reasonable pace. At end-2022, outstanding broad money M2, narrow money M1, and currency in circulation M0 registered RMB266.4 trillion, RMB67.2 trillion, and RMB10.5 trillion, respectively, up 11.8 percent, 3.7 percent, and 15.3 percent year on year, respectively. The entire year of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB1.4 trillion, RMB733.4 billion more than that in 2021. The AFRE grew steadily. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB344.21 trillion at end-December and its year-on-year growth registered 9.6 percent. In 2022, the AFRE increment totaled RMB32.01 trillion, RMB668.9 billion more than that in 2021. The AFRE has the following structural features: first, RMB loans maintained reasonable growth. In 2022, the increment in RMB loans issued by financial institutions to the real economy grew by RMB974.6 billion year on year to RMB20.91 trillion, accounting for 65.3 percent of the AFRE increment during the same period. Second, compared with the previous year, the increment in government bonds grew while that in corporate bonds fell. The increment in government bonds increased by RMB107.4 billion year on year, while that in corporate bonds decreased by RMB1.24 trillion year on year. Third, off-balance-sheet financing decreased at a slower pace year on year. In 2022, the increase in entrusted loans was RMB527.5 billion more than that in 2021, while decreases in trust loans and undiscounted bankers’ acceptances were RMB1.41 trillion and RMB150.5 billion, respectively, less than the decreases in 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions decreased by a larger margin year on year, while loans written off remained basically flat year on year.Box 2 Pursuing a Sound Monetary Policy to Stabilize the Economy A stable currency is the cornerstone of stabilizing the economy, employment, and prices, and stability is a key requirement for implementing a sound monetary policy. From a counter-cyclical perspective, the macro economy is a non-interruptible continuous process, and the overarching priority of financial macro management is to stabilize an unstable economy. The goal of monetary policies is to smooth out fluctuations in total demand in economic operations and to protect production factors and social wealth from the damage caused by booms and busts. From an inter-temporal perspective, the strength of monetary policies should remain stable, and the central banks should refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies that may bring about excessive investment, debt escalation, asset bubbles, and a number of other problems. Moreover, central banks should take targeted measures to optimize the economic structure so as to increase the endogenous stability of the economy, to maintain long-term stable and sound economic development, and to practice the general principle of seeking progress while maintaining stability. As the macro economy and prices continue to remain stable, the expectations of economic entities, i.e., residents’ expectations of future income, enterprises’ expectations of future operations, and foreign investments’ expectations of economic and trade exchanges, will be more stable, which will help increase the certainty of a virtuous cycle between effective demand and effective supply, consumption and investment, as well as domestic demand and external demand. As a result, stability of the macro economy will be further enhanced and the goal of monetary policies to stabilize the economy can be achieved at a relatively low policy price. In the past five years, the PBOC, in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, has continually implemented a sound monetary policy, providing “stable” support for high-quality development. The five years have been extremely unusual and extraordinary as the world has confronted accelerated changes unseen in a century, with a far-reaching impact from the once-in-a-century pandemic and the intensified geographical conflicts. China is facing certain restraints in its efforts to further push up total factor productivity. The traditional economic growth drivers, such as labor and land, are losing steam, while the triple pressures from shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakening expectations have been mounting in recent years. Therefore, risks are on the rise in some areas, highlighting the importance of stability in the macro economy. In the face of the complex and severe domestic and international situations, China has implemented a sound monetary policy, prioritized stability, responded to change with stability, and maintained normal monetary policy space. The central bank refrains from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies when the economy goes down and it does not make a sharp turn when the economy recovers. Therefore, the PBOC responds to internal and external uncertainties with astable monetary policy, thus creating a favorable monetary and financial environment for stabilizing the macro economy. First, money and credit aggregates maintained steady growth, providing stable support for the real economy. Since 2018, the PBOC has cut the RRR 14 times to release long-term liquidity of over RMB11 trillion. It has also employed OMOs, MLFs, central bank lending, and other monetary policy instruments in a flexible manner to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The PBOC has worked to improve the mechanism for money supply management as its balance sheet remains basically stable so as to ensure an appropriate aggregate money supply. The average annual growth rate of M2 posted 9.5 percent from 2018 to 2022, which was generally in step with or slightly higher than the nominal economic growth rate of 7.8 percent during the corresponding period, providing strong support for economic operations within a reasonable range.Second, interest rate adjustments were made based on the domestic situation, and overall financing costs were steadily brought down. The PBOC cherished space for its normal monetary policy. It worked to guide a steady decline in actual loan rates by taking innovative measures to conduct the LPR reform and by improving the self-regulatory mechanism for market-based interest rate pricing. Facing the challenge of monetary policy tightening in the major developed economies, the PBOC, based on the principle that domestic development should be prioritized, refused to follow suit. On the contrary, it moderately guided the policy interest rate downwards in spite of the limited space for interest rate cuts to ensure that interest rates remained within a reasonable range and to meet the requirement for stabilizing domestic demand and employment in the first place. The obvious policy effect has been delivered, as the interest rate on corporate loans has decreased from a high of 5.60 percent in 2018 to 3.97 percent in December 2022, the interest rate on personal housing loans has decreased from 5.75 percent to 4.26 percent, and the interest rate oncorporate bonds has also decreased. All of this has effectively eased the debt burden on the real economy and has continuously stimulated effective financing demand.Third, the RMB exchange rate remained market-oriented and basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBOC has firmly upheld the decisive role of the market in resource allocation, and it has enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate. Meanwhile, the PBOC also guided and stabilized market expectations through market-based measures, withdrew from normal interventions, and improved a managed floating exchange-rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. In the past few years, the PBOC has carried out indirect management mainly through market-based policy measures, even when the pressure of exchange rate devaluation was mounting. In general, the movement of the RMB exchange rate has been determined by demand and supply in the foreign exchange market. Since 2019, affected by market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar “topped seven” three times, but it soon returned to below seven. In 2022, in the midst of the interest rate spikes in the developed economies, the US dollar index strengthened and the RMB weakened, which was completely market-driven. The PBOC has adopted an appropriate mix of monetary policy instruments, not only prioritizing domestic development but also ensuring the decisive role of the market in the exchange rate formation. At the same time, it has made efforts to stabilize expectations and to bring into play the role of the exchange rate as a stabilizer for macroeconomic management and as a buffer against external shocks, effectively responding to this round of external shocks and thus creating a favorable external market environment for the successful convening of the 20 th CPC National Congress and a stable macro economy. From a historical perspective, the RMB is a strong currency. The RMB exchange rate has appreciated nearly 20 percent against the US dollar and about 40 percent against a basket of currencies since the start of the exchange rate reform in 2005.The PBOC, based on “stability,” innovates and employs structural monetary policy instruments to gather “momentum” for high-quality development. As the Chinese economy gears toward high-quality development, both supply and demand face constraint, but the main contradiction lies on the supply side. Structural monetary policy instruments that are “focused, reasonable, moderate, and flexible” give play to their advantages in expanding the aggregate, optimizing the structural, and stabilizing the prices, aiming at both expanding domestic demand and optimizing supply, and helping to channel financial resources into key areas, such as micro and small businesses (MSBs), green development, and sci-tech innovation, in a bid to effectively upgrade and appropriately expand economic output and to inject new momentum into stabilizing the macro economy and pursuing high-quality development. In 2018, the PBOC led the launch of a “three-arrow” policy mix of credit, bonds, and equity, helping private enterprises out of their funding difficulties as all the funding channels were narrowing. In the wake of the outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020, the PBOC stepped up the efforts to support market entities from the supply side, launching central bank lending and central bank discounts in three stages in an amount of RMB300 billion, RMB500 billion, and RMB1 trillion, respectively. Interest rates were more market-based and policy coverage was becoming increasingly wide. Moreover, the PBOC introduced two instruments that could provide direct support for the real economy, i.e., the support instrument for deferred repayments of inclusive MSB loans and the support scheme for unsecured loans, both of which were later converted into the instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans so as to enhance funding support for MSBs. Since 2021, the PBOC has set up a carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coal, with the aim of promoting green development in a scientific and orderly manner; it has launched special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care services, the transport and logistics sectors, and equipment upgrading and renovation, strengthening targeted support for key areas; guided the launch of two batches of policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments with a total amount of RMB739.9 billion, leveraging effective infrastructure investment; introduced special loans to ensure delivery of residential buildings worth RMB350 billion and a support scheme for loans to guarantee property delivery in the amount of RMB200 billion, buttressing the sound operation of the real estate market. As of end-2022, the outstanding balance of structural monetary instruments posted RMB6.4 trillion, about 15 percent of the PBOC’s total assets. In general, the sound monetary policy has strongly promoted the achievement of an optimal mix of policy objectives, i.e., rapid social and economic development, full employment, and price stability. From 2018 to 2022, the average annual growth rate of China's GDP exceeded 5 percent, significantly higher than the global average, and the average annual increase in urban employment was over 12 million. In 2022,China's CPI rose by 2 percent year on year, far below the average global figure of more than 8 percent. Against the backdrop of elevated global inflation, prices remained basically stable. Average inflation rates in the CPI during the past five and ten years were both around 2 percent, achieving the long-term inflation target of 2 percent that has been pursued by the major economies. Moreover, residents' inflation expectations remained stable, laying a foundation to ensure price levels are kept generally stable in the medium and long terms.Going forward, the PBOC will, in accordance with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, continue to promote financial development with Chinese characteristics. It will implement the sound monetary policy in a precise and effective manner, maintain \appropriate growth of money and credit, steadily bring down overall financing costs, and bring into play the guiding and incentivizing role of structural monetary policy instruments. All these policy efforts will provide stable strategic support and gather momentum for high-quality economic development and they will contribute to realization of the Chinese path to modernization. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level In 2022, amid complicated changes in international economic and financial developments, the central banks of the major developed economies took swift actions to raise interest rates, and volatility in global foreign exchange markets intensified. The US dollar index fluctuated violently, hitting a 20-year high, but falling continuously starting in November. Major non-US dollar currencies also repeatedly hit 20-year lows. The RMB enjoyed relatively stable performance among the major global currencies, featuring two-way fluctuations and enhanced flexibility throughout the year, and it played a role as an auto stabilizer in macroeconomic management and in the balance of payments. The market plays a decisive role in the formation of theRMB exchange rate. Cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and market expectations have been stable on the whole. In 2022, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate depreciated against a basket of currencies. At end-2022, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) and the RMB Exchange Rate Index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 98.67 and 96.08, respectively, down 3.7 percent and 4.3 percent, respectively, from end-2021. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end-2021 to end-2022, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB depreciated 2.9 percent and 7.9 percent, respectively. From 2005 when the reform of the RMB exchange-rate formation regime began to December 2022, the NEER and REER of the RMB appreciated 44.2 percent and 45.6 percent, respectively. At end-2022, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.9646, depreciating 8.5 percent from end-2021 and appreciating 18.8 percent on a cumulative basis since the beginning of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005. In 2022, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.4 percent. In 2022, cross-border RMB settlements increased 15 percent year on year to RMB42.1 trillion, 49 percent of total annual cross-border settlements in RMB and foreign currencies. Specifically, RMB receipts and payments posted RMB20.5 trillion and RMB21.6 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 32 percent year on year to RMB10.5 trillion. In particular, RMB settlements under trade in goods registered RMB7.9 trillion, while RMB settlements under trade in services and under other items registered RMB2.6 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB31.6 trillion, increasing 10 percent year on year. In 2022, cross-border RMB settlements under trade in goods and under direct investment accounted for 18 percent and 70 percent of total annual cross-border settlements in RMB and foreign currencies, respectively, the highest level in recent years.Part 2 Monetary Policy Operations In Q4 2022, the PBOC studied and implemented the guiding principles of the 20th CPC National Congress, and, in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it fully implemented a package of policies and follow-up measures. It worked to keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, smooth liquidity supply at junctures such as year-end, guide steady growth of money and credit, scale up financial support for the real economy, especially for weak links and key areas, promote a steady decline in overall financing costs, and uphold the decisive role of the market in exchange rate formation. These efforts laid a solid foundation for the economy to stabilize and gain momentum. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner. In Q4 2022, following the macroeconomic and financial situations at home and abroad, the PBOC injected medium and long-term liquidity by adopting a mix of tools, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), and central bank lending. In addition, the PBOC conducted open market operations on a daily basis, managed the intensity and pace of open market operations in a flexible and targeted manner in view of the demands of primary dealers, adjusted the maturities of operations to offset the impacts of temporary factors such as fiscal levies, government bond issuances, and liquidity fluctuations at year-end, thus keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. In mid-to-late December, responding to an increasing number ofCOVID-19 cases, the growing number of absences in financial institutions, and rising demand for precautionary funds, the PBOC preemptively pumped cross-year liquidity at an early stage. From December 19 to December 30, the PBOC injected a total of RMB1.73 trillion into the market via 7-day and 14-day reverse repos, averaging more than RMB200 billion daily in the last week, which effectively satisfied market demand and ensured ample liquidity at year-end as well as smooth movement of money market rates. In 2022, the rates of the open market 7-day reverse repos fell by 20 basis points after two cuts, which was conducive to boosting market confidence, bringing down overall financing costs, and providing strong support for the real economy. The annual weighted average rate of 7-day repos between depository institutions in the interbank market (DR007) posted 1.76 percent, a decrease of 41 basis points from 2021. Interest rates witnessed heightened stability at quarter-end and at year-end. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q4 2022, the PBOC conducted three batches of CBS operations, totaling RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. In 2022, the PBOC conducted CBS operations on a monthly basis, and these operations played a positive role in improving liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting banks, especially small and medium-sized banks to replenish capital through the issuance of perpetual bonds and in strengthening the capacity for credit supply. Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q4 2022, the PBOC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. In 2022, the PBOC issued twelve batches of central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB 120 billion. The regular issuance of central bank bills in Hong Kong is conducive to promoting sound development of the offshore RMB money market and the bond market and to propelling both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and conduct RMB businesses in the offshore market. II. Conducting medium-term lending facility and standing lending facility operations Conducting MLF operations to fully meet market demand. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding roles of the medium-term policy rates, the PBOC conducted a total of RMB4.55 trillion of MLF operations in 2022, all with a maturity of one year. The interest rate registered 2.85 percent in the first seven months and 2.75 percent from August to December. In particular, the amount of MLF operations postedRMB1.2 trillion, RMB0.45 trillion, RMB0.9 trillion, and RMB2.0 trillion in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, respectively. At year-end, outstanding MLFs registered RMB4.55 trillion, which was on par with that at the beginning of 2022. Conducting standing lending facility (SLF) operations. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations, strengthen the stability of liquidity in the banking system, and prevent liquidity risks. In 2022, the PBOC conducted a total of RMB25.3 billion of SLF operations, of which operations in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 registered RMB6.4 billion, RMB2 billion, RMB2.2 billion, and RMB 14.7 billion, respectively. At year-end, outstanding SLF operations registered RMB12.3 billion. The SLF rate continued to serve as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, which helped maintain smooth operation of the money market. At end-2022, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.85 percent, 3.00 percent, and 3.35 percent, respectively, flat with those at the end of Q3. III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions Two rounds of RRR cuts for financial institutions were announced to bolster the real economy and promote a steady decline in overall financing costs. On April 25 and December 5, the PBOC reduced the RRR for financial institutions (excluding those that had already implemented an RRR of 5 percent), by 0.25 percentage points each time. To ramp up support for MSBs and agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, urban commercial banks conducting businesses within the province of registration and rural commercial banks implementing an RRR of over 5 percent enjoyed an additional RRR cut of 0.25 percentage points starting from the RRR cut in April. About RMB1.03 trillion of long-term funds were freed up by the two cuts in 2022. The required reserve ratio for foreign-currency deposits was lowered twice in 2022, and financial institutions were urged to enhance foreign exchange liquidity management. The PBOC lowered the required reserve ratio for foreign-currency deposits on May 15 and September 15, by 1 percentage point and 2 percentage points, respectively. The ratio declined from 9 percent to 6 percent after the two cuts, releasing around USD27 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. The risk reserve ratio for forward FX sales was raised in due course. In order to stabilize foreign exchange market expectations, the PBOC raised the foreign exchange risk reserve ratio for forward foreign exchange sales from zero to 20 percent, effective from September 28, 2022.IV. Further improving the macro-prudential system and the management framework Giving full play to the role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) in optimizing the credit structure and promoting the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In 2022, the PBOC further optimized the MPA framework and guided financial institutions to enhance stability in the growth of credit aggregates and to step up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector, and for green development. Raising the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing. On October 25, in order to further improve the unified macro-prudential management of cross-border financing, expand the source of cross-border funds for enterprises and financial institutions, and guide them to optimize their liability structure, the PBOC and State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) decided to raise, from 1 to 1.25, the macro-prudential adjustment parameter for cross-border financing of enterprises and financial institutions. Improving macro-prudential management practices of real estate finance. In 2022, the PBOC constantly improved macro-prudential management practices of real estate finance. It implemented the real estate loan concentration management system with proper intensity and at a proper pace and it refined arrangements for the transitional period. Eligible banking financial institutions were encouraged to issue real estate loans in a sound manner so as to better meet reasonable demands for housing financing. The PBOC also excluded loans for affordable rental housing projects from real estate loan concentration management to increase support for the development of affordable rental housing. Refining the regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions. The PBOC and CBIRC jointly solicited public opinions on the Assessment Methodology of Systemically Important Insurance Companies (Exposure Draft). The document stipulates the methods, coverage, procedures, and division of work to assess domestic systemically important insurance companies. On the basis of the size of their assets, the top ten largest insurance groups, life insurance companies, property and casualty insurance companies, and reinsurance companies were assessed based on four dimensions, i.e., size, interconnectedness, asset liquidation, and substitutability. On September 9, the PBOC and CBIRC released a list of China’s systemically important banks (SIBs) for 2022. A total of 19 banks were designated as SIBs based on 2021 statistics, consisting of 6 state-owned commercial banks, 9joint-stock commercial banks, and 4 city commercial banks. Implementing market access management and continuous regulation of financial holding companies (FHCs) in a sound and orderly manner. In 2022, the PBOC approved establishment of China CITIC Financial Holdings, Beijing Financial Holdings Group, and China Merchants Financial Holdings. The PBOC carried out all-round, continuous, and penetrating regulation over FHCs on a consolidated basis. It enhanced supervision of shareholders and of the ownership structure, and required FHCs to maintain adequate capital, improve corporate governance, strengthen risk isolation, enhance management of related-party transactions, and operate pursuant to the laws and regulations so as to achieve high-quality development. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs, central bank discounts, pledged supplementary lending (PSL), and other policy instruments to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and weak links in the economy and coordinate regional development. Central bank lending to support rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand their credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to current regulations so as to consolidate the achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBOC promoted coordinated regional development by guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces to make effective use of policy instruments, such as central bank lending, and to expand credit supply for weak links within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private enterprises. More relief and assistance were provided for MSBs, and locally incorporated financial institutions were guided to employ central bank lending for MSBs and self-employed businesses that were heavily hit by COVID-19 so as to reduce their financing costs. To give play to the role of finance in supporting effective investments, the PBOC employed PSL to support the development banks and the policy banks in setting up financial instruments and providing credit support for key areas in the infrastructure sector. At end-2022, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB600.4 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.4171 trillion and RMB146.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB558.3 billion, while outstanding PSL posted RMB3.1528 trillion. Continuously implementing instruments supporting inclusive MSB loans to bolster the development of MSBs. In Q4, the PBOC provided incentive funding of RMB 6.16 billion to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increaseof RMB310.7 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Since implementation of this instrument, incentive funding from the PBOC to locally incorporated financial institutions totaled RMB27.46 billion, supporting a total increase of RMB1.6054 trillion in inclusive MSB loans. Implementing both the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal so as to support the green and low-carbon transition of the economy. In Q4, through these two instruments, the PBOC provided relevant financial institutions with RMB70.8 billion and RMB23.4 billion, respectively, or total funding of RMB94.2 billion. Since implementation of these two instruments, the PBOC cumulatively provided RMB309.7 billion and RMB81.1 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB390.8 billion. In order to maintain financial support for green development and energy supply guarantees, implementation of the CERF will be extended to end-2024, and implementation of the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal will be extended to end-2023. Accelerating implementation of special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, the transport and logistics sectors, and equipment upgrading and renovation, respectively. In Q4, through the aforementioned four instruments, the PBOC provided relevant financial institutions with central bank lending totaling RMB120 billion, RMB300 million, RMB13.9 billion, and RMB80.9 billion, respectively. Since implementation of these instruments, the PBOC issued cumulative funds totaling RMB200 billion, RMB700 million, RMB24.2 billion, and RMB80.9 billion, respectively. In order to enhance financial support for the smooth operation of transport and logistics, implementation of special central bank lending for transport and logistics will be extended until end-June 2023, and small and medium-sized logistics and storage enterprises will be added to the list of enterprises eligible for the instrument. Supporting financial institutions to temporarily reduce interest on inclusive MSB and toll-road loans. Following the decisions of the State Council executive meetings, the PBOC rolled out the policy of temporarily reducing interest on inclusive MSB loans in November 2022 and the toll-road loan facility in January 2023. Relevant financial institutions were supported to reduce the interest rate on inclusive MSB and toll-road loans by one percentage point and 0.5 percentage points in Q4 2022, respectively. Financial institutions were encouraged to surrender profits to enterprises through direct reductions or the return of collected interest. As for the actual amount of interest reduced by financial institutions, the PBOC provided funding incentives for them to reduce it by the full amount. Once completed, the two policies will be smoothly withdrawn.Launching the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects to support financial institutions in issuing loans to overdue housing projects so as to ensure their delivery. In line with the decisions of the State Council executive meetings, the PBOC launched the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects with a quota of RMB200 billion, following the principles of targeted liquidity, positive incentives, and market-oriented approaches. In December 2022, the PBOC released the Notice on Launching the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects, which clarifies that special central lending adopts a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a quarterly basis. The scheme supports loans issued by financial institutions from November 1, 2022, to March 31, 2023. After independently making the decision to grant loans at their own risk, financial institutions can apply to the PBOC for funding support. For qualified loans, the PBOC provides funding support equal to 100 percent of the principal. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in structural guidance Constantly improving the level of financial services for MSBs. The PBOC encouraged financial institutions to follow market-oriented principles to allow deferrals of the principal and the interest repayments on loans to eligible MSBs due in Q4 2022, effectively alleviating pressure for principal and interest repayments by market entities. The PBOC promoted implementation of the Notice on Promoting the Establishment of the Long-term Mechanism for Boosting the Financial Sector’s Confidence, Willingness, Capability, and Expertise in Lending to Micro and Small Businesses and it guided financial institutions to stipulate detailed rules for implementation and to enhance their allocations of internal resources and policy arrangements. As of end-2022, inclusive MSB loans and the number of MSBs granted loans registered a year-on-year increase of 23.8 percent and 26.8 percent, respectively. Increasing financial support for rural revitalization. The PBOC continued to put in place the Opinions on Ensuring Financial Support for Advancing Rural Revitalization on All Fronts in 2022 and worked with a number of ministries to release the Work Plan for Expanding Current Investment in the Construction of Agricultural and Rural Infrastructure, enhancing financial support for the construction of agricultural and rural infrastructure and expanding effective investments. The PBOC made efforts to provide financial services for ensuring a stable and secure supply of grain and key agricultural products, increased the supply of financial resources for the production and circulation of agricultural products and the new industrial and business forms, and promoted the integrated development of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in the rural areas. As of end-2022, outstanding agro-related loans registered a year-on-year increase of 14.0 percent, reaching RMB49.3 trillion.Strengthening coordination and cooperation between the industrial policy and the financial policy so as to enhance the efficiency of financing matchmaking based on the departmental coordination mechanism. The PBOC kept track of the new loans for the manufacturing sector and sci-tech innovation, strengthened supervision and guidance and promoted the channeling of more resources to the relevant areas. As of end-December, medium and long-term lending to the manufacturing sector witnessed year-on-year growth of 36.7 percent, maintaining growth of about 30 percent for 26 consecutive months. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform have been continuously unleashed, thus further bringing down the actual loan rates. Since 2022, under guidance, the one-year and over-five-year LPR have dropped 0.15 and 0.35 percentage points, respectively. In April, the PBOC established the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates, urged banks to take for reference the bond rates represented by the yield on 10-year government securities and the loan rates represented by the one-year LPR so as to reasonably adjust the deposit interest rates. In September, major banks voluntarily lowered their posted deposit rates and the authorized ceiling on their internal pricing, and other banks followed suit. This marks a crucial step forward in the market-oriented reform of deposit rates. Lowering the interest rate floor on first-home loans. The PBOC reduced the interest rate floor on first-home loans from the LPR of the corresponding duration to LPR minus twenty basis points at the national level and the interest rate policy for second-home loans remained unchanged. The interest rate on personal housing provident fund loans was cut by 0.15 percentage points, better meeting the basic funding demands of residents. Based on a temporary cut in the interest rate floor on first-home loans in some cities in September, the PBOC and the CBIRC established a dynamic mechanism for mortgage rates of first-time home buyers on December 30. It allowed the municipal governments to scientifically evaluate the price changes of local commercial housing sales on a quarterly basis, thereby dynamically adjusting their first-home loan policy. If the prices of newly built commercial housing sales witness a month-on-month and a year-on-year decline for three consecutive months, they can temporarily maintain, lower, or remove the interest rate floor for first-home loans. VIII. Improving the regime for the market-oriented formation of the RMB exchange rate The PBOC continued to advance the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange-rate regime based on marketsupply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It ensured that the market played a decisive role in determining the exchange rate. The PBOC focused on guiding expectations and enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate while keeping it basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. As a result, the exchange rate played the role of an auto stabilizer in macroeconomic management and for the balance of payments. In 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the U.S. dollar were 6.3014 and 7.2555, respectively. During the 242 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 114 days and depreciated on 128 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 1.4 percent (1008 bps) and 1.0 percent (681 bps), respectively. The RMB depreciated against the dollar and the euro, while it appreciated against other major currencies. As of end-2022, the central parity of the RMB against the U.S. dollar and the euro depreciated 8.5 percent and 2.7 percent, respectively, from end-2021, while the central parity of the RMB against the pound and the Japanese yen appreciated 2.5 percent and 5.8 percent, respectively, during the same period. From 2005, when the reform of the RMB exchange-rate formation regime began to end-2022, the RMB appreciated 18.8 percent, 34.9 percent, and 39.5 percent, respectively, against the U.S. dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen cumulatively. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which reduced the exchange costs for microeconomic entities and promoted bilateral trade and investment. As of end-2022, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBOC and the overseas monetary authorities, the overseas monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB88.777 billion and the PBOC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD551 million. These operations promoted bilateral trade and investment.IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions More achievements were made in forestalling and defusing financial risks. The PBOC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with some prominent financial risks properly resolved. Addressing the risks of key groups and large enterprises was steadily advanced, and progress was made in resolving the risks of small and medium banks in high-risk regions. Central bank ratings on financial institutions were conducted on a quarterly basis, according to which banking financial institutions in China were basically sound with controllable risks. The PBOC conducted differentiated management of financial institutions according to the rating results to make risk forestalling and defusing more targeted. It also strengthened the monitoring and early warnings on bank risks, made timely corrections in response to the emerging problems, and guided any anomaly indexes in most of the banks to return to normal, thus promoting early identification and resolution of risks. In addition, the PBOC designated some pilot areas in which it strengthened the hard constraints of early and timely rectifications of new high-risk institutions. The PBOC conducted annual stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions, including 19 Domestic Systemically Important Banks, and it developed a stress-testing system that was more scientific, systematic, and automatic. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBOC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scopes, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. It guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main businesses, and play an effective role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthening risk prevention and control. Box 3 Reinforcing Systems that Safeguard Financial Stability and Ensuring that No Systemic Risks Arise During the past five years, the PBOC has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and resolutely implemented the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. In line with the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it has coordinated with relevant government agencies to fight the toughbattle of preventing and defusing major financial risks, continuously reinforced the systems that safeguard financial stability, effectively responded to the test of serious and complicated situations in and out of China and COVID-19 shocks, and maintained financial security, stability, and development, therefore fostering a safe and stable environment for the sustained and healthy development of the financial sector. First, resolving major financial risks in a targeted and effective manner In line with the arrangements and requirements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBOC has coordinated with relevant government agencies to fight the tough battle of preventing and defusing major financial risks, effectively resolving major financial risks in a targeted and effective manner and thoroughly overhauling shadow banking and cracking down on illegal financial activities. After three years of focused and arduous efforts, the rising momentum of systemic financial risks has been contained, and the trend that funds are diverted out of the real economy and there is blind expansion in the financial sector has been fundamentally reversed, holding firmly to the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. First, effectively resolving the risks of key high-risk groups. The PBOC has “defused bombs with precision” among high-risk groups with large assets and liabilities, including conglomerates such as Mingtian, Anbang, Huaxin, and the HNA Group. Decisive actions have been initiated to take over ten financial institutions under the Mingtian conglomerate, such as Baoshang Bank. Anbang Group has been split and restructured with Dajia, a newly established insurer. An integrated bankruptcy has been completed in the Huaxin Group to ensure that all creditors are repaid fairly based on the law. The bankruptcy and restructuring of the HNA group have been completed, with the rights and interests of old shareholders cleared to guarantee the rights and interests of creditors, to ensure safe operation of its main business line (aviation), and to safeguard social stability. Second, promoting reforms and risk mitigation of small and medium-sized financial institutions in an orderly manner. The PBOC has successfully resolved risks in key financial institutions such as Hengfeng Bank. Financial restructuring as well as capital increases and share expansion plans have been smoothly implemented in Harbin Bank and Bank of Gansu. From 2020 to 2022, an additional RMB550 billion of special-purpose bonds for local governments have been issued to replenish capital for small and medium-sized banks. The PBOC supported and coordinated with relevant local governments to promote reforms and risk mitigation of small and medium-sized financial institutions, thereby decreasing the number of high-risk small and medium-sized financial institutions.Third, thoroughly overhauling shadow banking and cracking down on illegal financial activities. The PBOC launched new rules on asset management and supporting implementation rules to introduce unified regulatory standards with a focus on breaking up the high-risk shadow banking business and cross-market financial products. “Quasi-credit” high-risk shadow banking dropped by nearly RMB30 trillion from its historical peak. The campaign to rectify risks in Internet financing has been smoothly completed, and nearly 5000 P2P lending firms have been closed. The harsh crackdown on illegal fund raising has been enforced, and a cumulative 25,000 cases have been filed and investigated during the past five years. Second, improving the building of an institutional system that safeguards financial stability During the past five years, the PBOC has forcefully advanced the building of an institutional system to prevent and defuse financial risks, continuously strengthened financial legislation, further improved the institutional framework for macro-prudential management, and continually enhanced the system for financial risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning. Therefore, the prevention and defusing of financial risks has become increasingly law-based and institutionalized, and an institutional foundation for sound financial operations has been further consolidated. First, legislation on financial stability has achieved remarkable progress. In cooperation with other government agencies, the PBOC has continued to advance legislation on financial stability and major progress has been made. In December 2022, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress for the first time reviewed the draft law on financial stability. The overall principles of the draft law are as follows: upholding the Party’s centralized and unified leadership over financial work and coordinating development and security; adopting a problem-oriented approach and applying systems thinking, making active efforts to improve the institutional arrangements for the entire process of handling financial risks, i.e., fending off risks in advance, defusing risks when they arise, and ex post resolution; adhering to market-oriented and law-based principles, and ensuring that relevant parties fulfill their respective responsibilities for addressing financial risks so that systemic risks and moral hazards are both guarded against; ensuring that responsibilities are matched with power and that the division of obligations is law-based, reasonable in light of the Chinese context, and improving the working mechanism for coordination and cooperation. Second, putting in place and improving the deposit insurance system. As of end-September 2022, there were 4,015 insured institutions nationwide. The limit of deposit insurance coverage in the amount of RMB500,000 provides full-amount insurance for 99.3 percent of depositors. Through enhanced publicity of depositinsurance, public awareness and its credibility have been built up significantly. In November 2020, the logo of deposit insurance was launched comprehensively, and regular and institutionalized promotion of deposit insurance emerged. The PBOC improved the risk-differentiated premium mechanism and early corrections have delivered initial results. By requiring insured institutions to adopt measures to defuse risks, such as the timely replenishing of capital, reining in asset growth, stemming the granting of credit for major transactions, and lowering the leverage ratio, the PBOC has pushed for hundreds of institutions to be removed from the list of problem insured institutions. The PBOC also worked to explore the role of deposit insurance as the resolution platform in a market-oriented and law-based manner to address risks in key regions and institutions. Third, establishing a fund for ensuring financial stability (the Fund). The Fund, controlled by the central authority, is positioned to provide funds to address China’s major financial risks. It is funded by financial institutions, financial infrastructure operators, and other entities. The Fund, along with the Deposit Insurance Fund and the relevant industry protection funds, comprise a “two-tier” system, and their cooperation and coordination jointly safeguard financial stability and security. In resolving major financial risks, financial institutions, shareholders and actual controllers, the Deposit Insurance Fund, and relevant industry protection funds should invest corresponding resources in accordance with the laws and their responsibilities. When financial risks seriously endanger financial stability, the Fund can ben used in line with the requirements. The basic framework of the Fund has been established with some accumulation of funds, and its funds have already been utilized in two risk resolution cases. Fourth, continuing to improve the system for financial risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning. The PBOC has comprehensively assessed the soundness of China’s financial system and since 2017 it has conducted quarterly central banking ratings of banking financial institutions, thus guiding financial institutions to operate in a prudent and sound manner. Since the end of 2020, the PBOC has conducted risk monitoring and early warning for banking financial institutions (level 1–level 7) on a quarterly basis, timely identifying any possible latent risks and taking measures to help most abnormal banking indicators return to normal levels. Stress tests have been conducted on about 4,000 banking institutions for eleven consecutive years. Fifth, strengthening integrated supervision over systemically important financial institutions. The PBOC has approved licenses to establish three financial holding companies, and market access management and continuous supervision have been carried out in a prudent and orderly manner. The PBOC unveiled supervisory regulations for systemically important financial institutions and it has improved thesupervisory framework. It strengthened integrated supervision and development planning for the financial infrastructure and it has facilitated creation of a well-organized, effective, advanced, reliable, and resilient financial infrastructure system. Release of the Administrative Measures for the Administration of the Total Loss-absorbing Capacity of Global Systemically Important Banks is aimed at enhancing the capability of global systemically important banks to serve the real economy and to fend off risks. Third, working approaches for the next step For the next step, the PBOC will fully implement the guiding principles of the 20 th CPC National Congress and the Central Economic Work Conference, prioritize stability while pursuing progress, effectively prevent and defuse major economic and financial risks, and strengthen systems that safeguard financial stability. It will continuously defuse risks in key corporations, groups, and financial institutions, further deepen reforms in financial institutions, steadily advance financial legislation, and continue to strengthen prudential supervision and behavioral supervision in the financial sector. The PBOC will commit itself to both addressing existing risks and guarding against potential risks, will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability to make up for shortcomings in financial risk prevention and resolution, and will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur . X. Improving the capability to serve foreign exchange arrangements Supporting development of cross-border financing. In January 2022, the People's Bank of China (PBOC) and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) issued the Notice on Overseas Lending by Banking Institutions, strengthening joint management of banks’ overseas lending, cross-border guarantees, outbound direct investments, and other businesses. In May, the SAFE issued the Notice on Supporting High-tech and “Specialized, Sophisticated, Distinctive, and Innovative” Enterprises in Carrying out Pilot Programs for Cross-border Financing Facilitation, deciding to further expand the pilot coverage to facilitate more high-tech and “specialized, sophisticated, distinctive, and innovative” enterprises to borrow foreign debt independently within a certain quota so as to accelerate their innovative development. Promoting the coverage and quality of facilitation policies for quality enterprises. In Shanghai, Guangdong, Shaanxi, Beijing, Shenzhen, Zhejiang, Qingdao, and Ningbo, a second batch of pilot projects of integrated local and foreign-currency capital pools for multinational corporations was carried out for 40 enterprises in order to facilitate the integrated use of cross-border funds by multinational corporations.Policy publicity and training was continuously carried out, with best business practices shared in the banking industry. More prudent and compliant banks were supported in taking facilitation measures to handle the foreign exchange trade receipt and payment business for enterprises with sound credit records, with the aim of continuously improving the convenience for market entities. The facilitation policies have covered all regions of China, and by the end of 2022, a total of USD1.2 trillion facilitation businesses had been processed. Part 3 Financial Market Conditions In 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates featured a downward movement, with increased transaction volumes. The interest rates of bond issuances were generally steady, with issuance volumes of government securities picking up. The bond market witnessed active transactions. The stock market index fluctuated downward, with turnover and the amount of funds raised decreasing year on year. In the insurance industry, premium revenue rose year on year and asset growth accelerated. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates witnessed a continuous decline, with increased market transactions In December 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 1.26 percent, 15 basis points lower than that in September 2022 and the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos posted 1.41 percent, 5 basis points lower than that in September 2022. The monthly weighted average interest rate for government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.11 percent, 30 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos. At end-2022, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 1.96 percent and 2.22 percent, respectively, down 17 basis points and 5 basis points from end-December 2021, respectively. Transaction volumes increased. In 2022, the volume of bond repos trading on the interbank market reached RMB1380 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB5.5 trillion, up 32 percent year on year. The cumulative volume of trading for interbank lending registered RMB146.8 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB587.3 billion and a year-on-year increase of 23.6 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 86.4 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2 percentage points year on year, and overnight lending constituted 89.2 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, the samepercentage as that in the previous year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 15.2 percent year on year to RMB403.5 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposits (CDs) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In 2022, about 26,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB20.5 trillion. The total volume of trading on the secondary market registered RMB232.0 trillion. At end-2022, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.2 trillion. In 2022, about 53,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB12.7 trillion, an increase of RMB1.3 trillion year on year. In 2022, the weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.22 percent, 15 basis points higher than that of the 3-month Shibor.Interest rate swap transactions remained stable. In 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 244,000 transactions, decreasing 3.2 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB21.0 trillion, a decrease of 0.4 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly, and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB14.2 trillion, accounting for 67.7 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate (FR) and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 89.3 percent and 9.7 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 834 transactions, with RMB124.04 billion of the notional principal.The interest rate options business developed at a steady pace. In 2022, a total of 525 interest rate options transactions were concluded, totaling RMB71.8 billion. Specifically, 6 were interest rate swap transactions, amounting to RMB1.7 billion of the notional principal, and 519 were interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB70.1 billion of the notional principal. 2. The coupon rates of bonds remained generally stable, while bond issuances remained unchanged with active trading of spot bonds The coupon rates of bonds remained generally stable. In December 2022, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.83 percent, 1 basis point higher than that in December 2021. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 3.00 percent, 2 basis points lower than the rate in December 2021. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.85 percent, 81 basis points higher than the rate in December 2021.The yield on government securities was generally stable with expanded term spreads. At end-December 2022, yields on 1-year and 3-year government securities decreased by 15 basis points and 5 basis points, to 2.10 percent and 2.40 percent from end-December 2021, respectively; yields on 5-year, 7-year, and 10-year government securities increased by 4 basis points, 4 basis points, and 6 basis points, to 2.64 percent, 2.82 percent, and 2.84 percent, from end-December 2021, respectively. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 74 basis points, expanding 21 basis points from end-December 2021. Bond issuances remained unchanged year on year. In 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances was RMB61.4 trillion, basically the same as that in the previous year. Specifically, the issuance of government securities increased more year on year, while the issuance of financial bonds and corporate credit bonds decreased year on year. At end-2022, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB144.8 trillion, representing an increase of 8.5 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed a marked increase. In 2022, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB309.1 trillion, registering an increase of 27.2 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank market was RMB271.2 trillion, representing an increase of 26.5 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB37.9 trillion, an increase of 32 percent year on year.3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market were generally stable The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB27.4 trillion, rising 13.4 percent year on year. At end-2022, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB17.4 trillion, increasing by 16.0 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances saw steady growth. At end-2022, outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew by RMB2.3997 trillion and RMB343.4 billion compared to the beginning of 2022 and end-Q3 2022, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 68.3 percent was issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with interest rates generally stable. In 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB53.9 trillion, growing 17.5 percent year on year. At end-2022, the balance of bill financing was RMB12.8 trillion, up 30.0 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 6 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 0.9 percentage points year on year. In 2022, the interest rates for bill financing first increased and then decreased, but they remained generally stable.4. The stock indices experienced a choppy fall with turnover and the amount of funds raised on the stock markets decreasing year on year The stock indices dropped. At end-2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,089 points, decreasing 15.1 percent from end-2021. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 11,016 points, decreasing by 25.9 percent from end-2021. The turnover on the stock markets declined year on year. In 2022, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB224.5 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB927.7 billion, representing a decrease of 12.6 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets witnessed a decrease year on year. In 2022, cumulative funds raised for the entire year were RMB1.3 trillion, a year-on-year decrease of 10.6 percent. 5. Premium income increased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In 2022, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB4.7 trillion, up 4.6 percent year on year, an acceleration of 5.4 percentage points compared to that recorded in 2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB1.5 trillion, representing a year-on-year decrease of 0.8 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 0.9 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went down by 2.4 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-2022, total assets in the insurance sector increased 9.1 percent year on year to RMB27.1 trillion, an acceleration of 2.3 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 8.3 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 7.8 percent year on year. 6. The turnover of spot foreign exchange transactions declined year on year In 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD8.3 trillion, a decrease of 16.6 percent year on year. The cumulativeturnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD19.3 trillion, a decrease of 4.9 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD12.6 trillion, accounting for 65.1 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD129.9 billion, rising 19.3 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD1.5 trillion, decreasing by 3.3 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 53.9 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, while international gold prices went up At end-2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,814 per ounce, representing an increase of 1.1 percent from end-2021. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB410.5 per gram, increasing by 9.8 percent from end-2021. In 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 39,000 tons, representing growth of 11.3 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB15.2 trillion, representing growth of 16 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market Institutional arrangements for bond lending were improved. In February 2022, the PBOC released the Measures for the Administration of Bond Lending in the Interbank Bond Market (Announcement No.1 [2022] of the PBOC). The Measures improve the institutional arrangements for bond lending in the interbank bond market by unifying the content of bond lending agreements, launching central bond lending, and improving the mechanism for default resolution. Requirements for risk prevention are also clarified in the Measures, involving aspects such as the reporting of high-value lending, information disclosures, risk monitoring, and self-regulation, aiming to protect the legitimate rights and interests of market participants, increase bond market liquidity, and enable the better functioning and sound development of the financial market. The variety of financial bonds issued by commercial banks was expanded. In April 2022, the PBOC and CBIRC jointly released the Notice on the Issuance of Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Eligible Non-Capital Bonds by Global Systemically Important Banks, specifying core elements and management regulations for the issuance of total loss-absorbing capacity eligible non-capital bonds. The Notice provides the basis for the orderly issuance of the said bonds by global systemically important banks.The bond market was further opened up in a high-quality manner. In May 2022, the PBOC, CSRC, and SAFE jointly released the Matters Concerning Further Facilitating Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Announcement No.4 [2022] of the PBOC, CSRC, and SAFE). Based on the principle of “one set of rules, one bond market,” the Announcement further facilitates overseas institutional investments in China’s bond market by unifying relevant policy requirements and cross-border fund management. 2. Institutional arrangements and reforms in the securities market The rule of law was strengthened in the capital market. In January 2022, the Supreme People’s Court released the Several Provisions on the Trial of Civil Cases for Damages for the Tort of Misrepresentation in the Securities Market, which raise the costs for unlawful acts in the capital market, urge all market participants to perform their respective duties, and ensure investors’ right to remedy. On April 20, the 34th session of the 13th NPC Standing Committee voted through the Futures and Derivative Law of the People's Republic of China. Aiming to serve the real economy, forestall and control financial risks, and deepen financial reform, the Law is characterized by market principles, the rule of law, and internationalization. It stipulates basic rules for futures and derivative markets in a comprehensive and systematic manner, thus filling the gaps in the legal framework of the capital market and providing legal guarantees for building a more regulated, transparent, open, vigorous, and resilient capital market. Reform of the registration-based IPO system was advanced in a stable manner. In April 2022, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on Improving Post-Delisting Supervision of Listed Companies, improving the delisting mechanism of listed companies and helping to create a sound environment for smooth market entry and exit. In May, the CSRC released the Provisions on Piloting the Business of Trading Stocks on the Sci-Tech Innovation Board by Securities Companies as Market Makers, which helped to introduce the market maker mechanism to the sci-tech innovation board in a bid to improve stock liquidity and market resilience. In May, the CSRC, MOJ, and MOF jointly released the Opinions on Strengthening Supervision of the Cleanness of Intermediaries under the Registration-based IPO System, for the purposes of regulating the cleanness of intermediaries and their staff members, facilitating the cracking down on financial corruption along with the forestalling and controlling of financial risks, and safeguarding the reform of the registration-based IPO system. Cooperation on audit regulation was deepened between China and the US. On August 26, 2022, the CSRC, MOF, and the US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) signed an audit oversight cooperation agreement. The agreement laid a foundation for equal and efficient cooperation in the next stage under the premise ofcomplying with both parties’ respective laws and regulations. On December 15, the PCAOB issued a report confirming that the PCAOB was able to inspect and completely investigate accounting firms headquartered in Chinese mainland and Hong Kong in 2022 and vacating its December 2021 determinations regarding relevant firms. The bilateral cooperation yielded positive results. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market Related-party transactions of insurance institutions were regulated. In January 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Related-Party Transactions of Banking and Insurance Institutions, introducing requirements on the number and scale of related-party transactions and focusing particularly on the risks of tunneling that directs profits to shareholders and their related parties. Following the principle of substance over form and penetrating regulation, the Rules improve recognition of related parties and their transactions, require institutions to shoulder primary responsibility for managing related-party transactions, and specify the punishment of institutions and their directors, supervisors, and senior executives for violations. In May, the CBIRC released the Notice on Strengthening Supervision of Related-Party Transactions in Insurance Institutions’ Fund Investment. The mechanism for capital replenishment of insurance companies was improved. In August, the PBOC and CBIRC jointly released the Notice on Issues Concerning the Issuance of Undated Capital Bonds by Insurance Companies, allowing insurance companies to replenish core Tier 2 capital by issuing undated capital bonds. The PBOC regulates the overall balance of capital replenishment bonds, including undated capital bonds issued by an insurance company. Institutional arrangements of the China Insurance Security Fund (CISF) were improved. In October 2022, the CBIRC, MOF, and PBOC revised and released the Rules on the Insurance Security Fund. The revision covers improvements in aspects such as fund-raising, financial requirements, fund use management, bailout provisions, and fund supervision so as to give better play to the role of the CISF in forestalling and defusing financial risks. The insurance industry was encouraged to participate in the development of the third pillar of the elderly care. In November 2022, the CBIRC released the Notice on Matters Related to Personal Pension Business of Insurance Companies, specifying basic requirements for insurance companies to carry out a personal pension business and allowing insurance companies to provide individuals who have personal pension accounts with qualified annuity insurance, endowment insurance, and other products approved by the CBIRC. The Notice also clarifies the management of capital, contracts, and sales, as well as customer services and the regulatory requirements of the personal pension business.Information disclosure of life insurance products was standardized. In November 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Information Disclosures of Life Insurance Products, specifying the content and objects of information disclosure by insurance companies, requiring insurance companies to improve their internal product information disclosure management mechanism, and clarifying the responsibilities of relevant management personnel as well as the regulatory measures and punishments that may be taken for violations of the Rules. The Rules shall take effect as of June 30, 2023. 4. Institutional arrangements of the financial infrastructure Swap Connect between Mainland and Hong Kong made its debut. On July 4, 2022, the PBOC, the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (HKSFC), and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) jointly announced the launch of development of mutual access between the Hong Kong and Mainland interest-rate swap markets (Swap Connect). Swap Connect will facilitate participation in the mainland RMB currency swap market by overseas investors and will support the financial opening-up at a high level. Bond Connect has operated smoothly and efficiently during the past five years. On July 4, 2022, the PBOC, HKSFC, and HKMA jointly hosted the fifth anniversary forum of Bond Connect and the ceremony launching Swap Connect via video link. Since its inception five years ago in 2017, Bond Connect has been serving as a two-way bridge and operating smoothly and efficiently, marking a major milestone in deepening the opening-up of China’s financial markets. Overall supervision and development planning of the financial infrastructure were strengthened. In December 2022, the PBOC solicited public opinions on the Measures for the Supervision of the Financial Infrastructure (Exposure Draft). The Measures aims to clarify the overall framework for the supervision of the financial infrastructure and to improve access management of the financial infrastructure so as to foster a new development paradigm featuring “dual circulation” and to serve the real economy with better financial services. Part 4 Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments Global inflation has eased recently, but remains at a historic high. The global economic recovery is slowing and global financial markets are seeing large swings as central banks in the major advanced economies continue their policy tightening. Thecumulative effect of this round of rate hikes is yet to be fully felt, and its implications for global economic growth, capital flows, and financial markets merit attention. 1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies Economic growth slowed down notably. In the US, GDP grew in Q4 by 2.9 percent at an annualized pace, posting a positive quarter-on-quarter growth for two straight quarters and pointing to higher probability of a soft landing. The fast rate hike by the Federal Reserve (Fed) has taken effect, as the growth rate was lower than the 3.2 percent in Q3. The US manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) was 48.4 in December, contracting for two straight months, while the non-manufacturing PMI plunged to 49.6 from 56.5 in November, the biggest month-on-month decline since the outbreak of COVID-19. In December, housing sales dropped 1.5 percent from a month earlier, a negative month-on-month growth for eleven consecutive months. In the euro area, GDP grew by 0.1 percent in Q4 quarter on quarter, a further slowdown from the 0.3 percent in Q3. In December, the PMI for manufacturing and services was 47.8 and 49.8, contracting for six and five straight months, respectively. In Japan, GDP in Q4 was back to the positive territory, growing 0.6 percent on an annualized basis. However, falling enterprise capital expenditure and inventory still weighs on economic recovery. Inflation came down in the US and Europe, but remained at a historic high. In December 2022, the US CPI was up by 6.5 percent year on year, falling for six months in a row, and the PCE rose 5.0 percent compared with the prior year. These two measures of inflation both remained elevated. The HICP in the euro area rose by 9.2 percent over the prior year, falling for two straight months. The CPI in the UK jumped by 10.5 percent compared with the previous year, 0.6 percentage points lower than the high of 11.1 percent in October. The CPI in Japan was up 4 percent year on year, the biggest jump since 1991. The recovery of labor supply was slow. Labor shortage remains a main problem in the major advanced economies. In the US, job vacancies stood at 11.012 million in December compared with 10.44 million in November, exceeding 10 million for eighteen consecutive months. The unemployment rate fell further to 3.5 percent in December, a historic low. Growth of US non-farm payrolls slowed to 223,000 in December from 263,000 in November. Going forward, performance of the labor market will depend on the relative changes in labor supply and demand. Global financial markets witnessed large swings. Stock markets in the US and Europe rallied, as market fears over higher rates for longer eased amid signs of falling inflation. Performance of bond markets diverged. The 10-year US Treasury yield rose above 4.2 percent in October and fluctuated downwards thereafter. As the European Central Bank (ECB) sent out a strong tightening signal, the yields on Europeangovernment bonds went up at the end of the year. The yield on 10-year Japanese government bond rose as the Bank of Japan raised the cap of its yield curve control policy. The US Dollar Index once hit a 20-year high and then fell, the euro rebounded to around 1.07 dollar per euro after falling below parity against the US dollar, and the Japanese yen depreciated to levels below 150 yen per dollar and was back to slightly higher than 130 yen per dollar at year end. The euro, Japanese yen, and British pound all hit a 20-year low against the US dollar.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The central banks in the major advanced economies slowed the pace of monetary tightening, but policy stance remained unchanged. In 2022, the Fed kicked off afresh round of rate hikes since December 2018 and raised rates on seven occasions by a total of 425 basis points (bps), bringing the federal funds rate to a target range of 4.25-4.5 percent from 0-0.25 percent at the start of the year. By breakdown, it hiked rate by 25 bps in March, 50 bps in May, 75 bps each in June, July, September and November, and 50 bps in December. In December dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2023 was 5-5.25 percent. In March, the Fed ended asset purchases, and in June began to reduce the size of its balance sheet with monthly cap for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities being USD30 billion and USD17.5 billion, respectively, which was then increased in September to USD60 billion and USD35 billion, respectively. In 2022, the ECB increased the interest rate for the first time in nearly eleven years. It raised the rate on four occasions, each by 50 bps, 75 bps, 75 bps, and 50 bps respectively. After a total hike of 250 bps, the interest rate on its main refinancing operations, marginal lending facility, and deposit facility now stood at 2.5 percent, 2.75 percent, and 2.0 percent, respectively. The ECB put an end to net asset purchases under its Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP) at end-March, and stopped net asset purchases under the Asset Purchase Program (APP) in July. It will start shrinking its balance sheet in March 2023 by a monthly average amount of EUR15 billion before the end of Q2 of 2023. The pace of unwinding after Q2 is yet to be determined. In the meantime, the ECB created the Transmission Protection Instrument (TPI) to ensure smooth transmission of monetary policy across the euro area. TPI purchases would be focused on public sector securities of the highly indebted members of the euro area. The Bank of England (BOE) started to raise rate in December 2021, and increased the Bank Rate eight times in 2022 by a total of 325 bps to 3.5 percent. In particular, it raised the Bank Rate by 75 bps in November, the biggest single hike in 2022, and hiked again by 50 bps in December. The BOE announced the decision to reduce its balance sheet in February, and began to sell investment-grade enterprise bonds and gilts in September and November respectively. The Bank of Japan increased its cap on 10-year bond yields from 0.25 percent to 0.5 percent. It ended as scheduled additional purchases of commercial paper and corporate bonds at end-March, with the pace of asset purchase back to pre-COVID levels. Among the other central banks, the Reserve Bank of Australia hiked rate eight times, while the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Bank of Korea all raised rates seven times, by a total of 300 bps, 400 bps, 350 bps, and 225 bps, respectively. Some emerging economies raised interest rates several times. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the spillovers from monetary policy tightening in the advanced economies, the major emerging market economies hiked their interest rates on several occasions in 2022. The central banks in Mexico and South Africa increased their interest rates eight and six times in 2022 by a total of 500 bps and 325 bps respectively, while the central banks in Brazil, India, and Indonesia all increased their rates five times by a total of 450 bps, 225 bps, and 200 bps, respectively.3. Issues and trends that merit attention The extent and pace of decline in overseas inflation remains uncertain. During previous episodes of high inflation caused by two oil shocks in the 1970s, it took more than one year for the elevated inflation to come down. Bringing inflation down is a gradual and bumpy journey with potential setbacks. In January 2023, the US CPI rose 0.5 percent month on month, higher than market expectations. At present, energy and other commodity prices are still susceptible to disruptions from geopolitical tensions, and the global supply chain is still facing challenges from near-shoring, friend-shoring and other protectionist measures despite eased supply chain strains. Downward pressure on the global economy is rising. In its latest forecast, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected that the world economy would grow 2.9 percent in 2023, 0.5 percentage points lower than the growth in 2022. The World Bank, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and other international organizations also revised down their global economic growth forecasts for 2023. On top of geopolitical tensions, energy crunch, and high inflation, monetary tightening also weighs on the economy. As the tightening effect has a lag and the rapid rate hikes by the major advanced economies have cumulative effects, the drag on global growth may be stronger than expected. Some financial risks may be exposed faster. First, tighter liquidity has amplified financial market adjustments. Asset prices have seen large swings. Non-bank financial institutions such as pension funds, insurers, and hedge funds are facing a mounting pressure. Some financially weak market entities may face shocks. Second, as rate hikes by the Fed speeds up flight to safety, other countries, in particular the developing economies will witness growing capital outflow pressures. Third, a stronger dollar coupled with worsening economic outlook at home may put to test the debt servicing capacity of those emerging market economies with a higher share of dollar-denominated debts. The new climate protectionism merits attention. The US Inflation Reduction Act provides subsidies for electric vehicles, and requires, among others, a specified portion of battery components must be manufactured or assembled in North America. The European Union (EU) has decided to implement Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism, which will increase the cost of exporting to the EU. This could have a far-reaching impact on the green transition of the global economy. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In 2022, in the face of the complicated and serious situations at home and abroad andthe impact of multiple unexpected factors, all regions and departments coordinated COVID-19 containment and economic and social development in an effective way, and accelerated implementation of a package of policy measures, providing robust support for the stability of macro economy. Economic output reached a new level. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in 2022 grew by 3.0 percent year on year to RMB121.0207 trillion on a comparable basis. By quarters, GDP in Q1 grew by 4.8 percent year on year, while that in Q2, Q3, and Q4 grew by 0.4 percent, 3.9 percent, and 2.9 percent year on year, respectively. According to the annual average exchange rate, GDP in 2022 totaled USD18 trillion, ranking second in the world. 1. Consumption remained basically stable, investments grew steadily, and imports and exports expanded rapidly. The increase in residents’ income kept pace with economic growth, and consumption remained generally stable. In 2022, the country’s per capita disposable income reached RMB36883, increasing by 5.0 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 2.9 percent year on year in real terms. The structure of income distribution continuously improved. The nominal and real growth rates of rural residents’ income were 2.4 percentage points and 2.3 percentage points higher than those of urban residents, respectively. In 2022, total retail sales of consumer goods declined by 0.2 percent year on year. Consumption of basic living items saw stable growth and retail sales of grain, oil, food, and beverages by enterprises (units) above the designated size increased by 8.7 percent and 5.3 percent year on year, respectively. Investments grew steadily with an improved structure. In 2022, national fixed-asset investments (excluding those by rural households) increased by 5.1 percent year on year to RMB57.2138 trillion. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 9.1 percent, 4.0 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure increased by 9.4 percent, 4.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in real estate development decreased by 10.0 percent. Investments in the high-tech industry grew by 18.9 percent, 13.8 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Social investments grew by 10.9 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in health and education grew by 27.3 percent and 5.4 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports expanded rapidly. In 2022, imports and exports of goods grew by 7.7 percent year on year to RMB42.0678 trillion. Specifically, exports grew by 10.5 percent year on year and imports grew by 4.3 percent year on year, with the surplus of trade in goods posting RMB5.8630 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share of imports and exports under general trade increasing by 2.2 percentage points year on year and accounting for 63.7 percent of total imports and exports. Imports and exports of private enterprises increased by 12.9 percent, accounting for 50.9 percent of total imports and exports, an acceleration of 2.3 percentage points yearon year. Imports and exports of machinery and electronics increased by 2.5 percent year on year, accounting for 49.1 percent of total imports and exports. China's imports and exports with its trading partners continued to rise. Imports and exports to the ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations), China's largest trade partner, and the countries along the Belt and Road grew by 15 percent and 19.4 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the manufacturing and high-tech industries. In 2022, actually utilized FDI increased by 6.3 percent year on year to RMB1.2327 trillion (equivalent to USD189.1 billion, growing by 8 percent year on year). The structure of FDI continued to be optimized. Actually utilized FDI in the manufacturing industry increased by 46.1 percent year on year, accounting for 26.3 percent of the total investment, an acceleration of 7.8 percentage points year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 28.3 percent year on year, accounting for 36.1 of the total investment, an acceleration of 7.1 percentage points year on year. 2. Agricultural production remained stable, industrial production maintained growth, and the service industry continued to recover. In 2022, the value-added of the primary industry totaled RMB8.8345 trillion, up 4.1 percent year on year; the value-added of the secondary industry totaled RMB48.3164 trillion, up 3.8 percent year on year; and the value-added of the tertiary industry totaled RMB63.8698 trillion, up 2.3 percent year on year. Agricultural production saw a bumper harvest, and animal husbandry grew steadily. In 2022, the country’s total grain output totaled 686.55 million tons, up 0.5 percent year on year, and annual output has been over 650 million tons for eight successive years. Specifically, the output of summer grains, early season rice, and autumn grains increased by 1.0 percent, 0.4 percent, and 0.4 percent, respectively. In 2022, output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 3.8 percent year on year; in particular, output of pork grew by 4.6 percent. At end-2022, the number of hogs in stock and for slaughter increased by 0.7 percent and 4.3 percent year on year, respectively. Industrial production maintained growth, and the equipment manufacturing sector and the high-tech manufacturing sector saw rapid growth. In 2022, the value-added of industrial enterprises above a designated size (IEDS) increased by 3.6 percent year on year. Specifically, the value-added of the mining sector increased by 7.3 percent year on year. The value-added of the manufacturing sector increased by 3.0 percent year on year. The electricity, heat, gas and water production and supply sectors increased by 5.0 percent year on year. The industrial structure was continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector increased by 7.4 percent and 5.6 percent year on year, respectively, which was3.8 percentage points and 2.0 percentage points higher than the growth of the value-added of IEDS, respectively. In terms of products, the output of new energy cars, base station equipment of mobile communication and Industrial Control Computer and system grew by 97.5 percent, 16.3 percent, and 15.0 percent year on year, respectively. The service industry continued to recover, and the modern service industry showed sound growth momentum. In 2022, the value-added of the services industry grew by 2.3 percent year on year. Specifically, the value-added of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services and the financial sector grew by 9.1 percent and 5.6 percent year on year, respectively. In 2022, the index of service production (ISP) decreased by 0.1 percent year on year. In particular, the ISP decreased by 0.8 percent year on year in December, a deceleration of 1.1 percentage points from November. From January to November, the revenue of service enterprises above a designated size (SEDS) increased by 3.9 percent year on year. Specifically, the revenue of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services, scientific research and technology services, health and social work enterprises increased by 8.3 percent, 8.3 percent, and 8.1 percent year on year, respectively. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and producer prices receded from their previous high level. Consumer prices increased moderately. In 2022, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased by 2.0 percent year on year, up 1.1 percentage points from that in 2021. The year-on-year increase in the CPI rose from 0.9 percent at the beginning of the year to a yearly high of 2.8 percent in September, and gradually fell back below 2 percent in the fourth quarter. Food prices increased by 2.8 percent for the entire year, accelerating by 4.2 percentage points from 2021. Non-food prices increased by 1.8 percent for the entire year, accelerating by 0.4 percentage points from 2021. Specifically, energy prices increased by 11.2 percent, constituting 40 percent of the overall CPI increase. The core CPI (excluding food and energy) rose moderately by 0.9 percent year on year, basically on par with that in the previous year. The growth of producer prices continued to narrow. Due to the pullback by commodity prices, the relatively weak demand, and the high base effect of 2021, growth of the Producer Price Index (PPI) continued to slide in 2022. The PPI increased by 4.1 percent year on year, decelerating by 4.0 percentage points from that in 2021. Specifically, the PPI in October, November, and December decreased by 1.3 percent, 1.3 percent, and 0.7 percent, respectively, falling into negative territory. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by 6.1 percent year on year, decelerating by 4.9 percentage points from 2021. In 2022, the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBOC increased by 3.5 percent year onyear, a deceleration of 1.2 percentage points from the first three quarters and a deceleration of 3.6 percentage points from 2021. Box 4 Household Consumption is Expected to Recover Steadily Further promoting consumption is not only an intrinsic requirement for fulfilling people’s aspirations for a better life but also an important component of the strategy to expand domestic demand. It is also one of the key areas of the economic work in 2023. In the new journey towards building a modern socialist country in all respects and achieving Chinese modernization, it is necessary to maintain positive growth of consumption and to enhance its fundamental role in economic development. From a historical perspective, when development in most economies enters a certain stage, consumption becomes an important endogenous driver for long-term economic growth, which is favorable for supporting sustainable development, promoting economic circulation, and improving household well-being. This is more pronounced in the advanced economies. For instance, the household consumption rate (the ratio of household consumption expenditure to GDP) in the US has steadily increased from around 60 percent to above 68 percent over the past five decades, and the contribution of household consumption to economic growth in the past two decades has averaged over 70 percent. Household consumption rates in the euro area, the UK, and Japan have also surpassed 50 percent. China is different from other countries in terms of stage of economic development, savings culture, and statistical methods for household consumption. There are also weak links in relevant areas, such as income, distribution, social insurance, and supply. As a result, the household consumption rate in China is relatively low. Since the 18th CPC National Congress, China has deepened economic structural transformation and adjustment and won a complete victory in the fight against poverty, leading to an improvement in the household consumption rate. However, there are both room and challenges for sustained improvement. Affected by COVID-19, the momentum of consumption in China has slowed down further during the past three years. The average year-on-year growth of total retail sales of consumer goods was 2.6 percent during the three-year pandemic period (2020–2022), 6.5 percentage points lower than that in the pre-pandemic three-year period (2017–2019). This was mainly due to the circulation bottlenecks in both supply and demand as well as the lack of consumption willingness, affected by continuous disturbances from COVID-19. First, from the supply side, the spread of COVID-19 limited multiple consumption scenarios, leading to “inconvenience to consume”, especially for those types of consumption that involve gathering or physical contact. Second, from the demand side, as the downward pressure on the economy increased, households faced challenges in employment, income, investment, and wealth management, resulting in “unwillingness to consume”. Third, from the perspective of confidence, as the complicated nature of COVID-19 further increased uncertainty of the economic outlook, the risk preference in the household sector decreased and household precautionary savings increased, leading to “reluctance to consume”. Looking ahead to 2023, the factors that have constrained recovery of consumption are expected to ease. First, with the optimization of the pandemicprevention and control measures, consumption scenarios will expand and demands for visiting family and friends, leisure and entertainment, tourism and catering that have been suppressed in recent years will recover. Second, as the economic recovery curve continues to rise, a mutually supportive and virtuous interaction is likely to be formed for supply and demand as well as employment and income. Therefore, households will gain more confidence in future income and consumption, and some of the previously accumulated precautionary savings will gradually be released to satisfy actual consumption demands. Third, the strategy of expanding domestic demand has been extensively implemented, with a series of consumption-promoting policies announced and implemented, and consumption coupons released in multiple rounds across the country. These policy measures will gradually take effect. From the high-frequency data since the beginning of 2023, volume and consumption data about passengers have both shown signs of recovery during the Spring Festival. International experience has shown that the major economies experienced a consumption recovery within one to four quarters after the peak of COVID-19, with some even surpassing pre-pandemic levels. However, it should also be noted that uncertainty about consumption recovery still exists. During the three-year pandemic period, household-income growth has slowed down, and to some extent, the household balance sheet has also suffered from shocks. Whether household savings can be converted into consumption remains to be seen, while the complexity of the future evolution of pandemic also requires attention. In addition, medium- to long-term factors that will influence household consumption, such as social insurance coverage for new urban residents and rural migrant workers, as well as unified national-level management for unemployment and social insurance, still need to be further improved. From a medium- to long-term perspective, the consumption engine will provide indispensable support for the goal of reaching per capita GDP level of the moderately developed economies in 2035. Therefore, we need to be determined in giving full play to the strategic role of consumption growth. Currently, it is necessary to further release the potential of consumption growth. With China’s urbanization entering advanced stage, marginal capital return decreasing, and the model of real estate development drastically changing, the sustainability of rapid expansion of investment is facing challenges. From the perspective of a more balanced and stable economic structure, consumption growth needs to play a more important role. There is still plenty of room for consumption to drive China’s economic growth in the future. Currently, China’s per capita GDP is close to the threshold of the high-income countries (USD13,200), but the household consumption rate is still significantly lower than that of the high-income countries. From a decomposition perspective, household consumption rate = (household consumption expenditure / household disposable income) x (household disposable income / GDP). To improve the rate of household consumption, it is important to increase both ratios. The former ratio can be improved by increasing the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of households, especially for the medium- and low-income groups. This requires great efforts to improve the consumption environment, to increase the supplyof high-quality consumer goods and services, and to guide the creation of new consumption demand. It is also necessary to maintain steady and relatively rapid growth in household income, to improve the social security system, and to continuously enhance household confidence and sense of security so as to further unleash the potential of consumption. The latter ratio mainly relies on the improvement of income-distribution patterns. There is room to further improve the ratio of household income to national income, the proportion of medium- to low-income groups and the proportion of primary distribution that goes to wages and salaries. Overall, in the medium- to long-term, it is necessary and feasible to maintain stable consumption growth, which will help to better achieve endogenously-driven economic growth. 4. Fiscal revenue rose steadily, and expenditures grew rapidly. In 2022, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB20370.3 billion, increasing by 9.1 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded), or an increase of 0.6 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 13.1 percent and 5.9 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded), respectively, increasing by 3.8 percent and decreasing by 2.1 percent (calculated on a natural basis), respectively. Tax revenue amounted to RMB16661.4 billion, increasing by 6.6 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded), and decreasing by 3.5 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, the domestic value-added tax increased by 4.5 percent year on year (the VAT credit refund excluded) and decreased by 23.3 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). The consumption tax and the corporate income tax increased by 20.3 percent and 3.9 percent, respectively. The personal income tax grew by 6.6 percent year on year. Non-tax income posted RMB3708.9 billion, increasing by 24.4 percent year on year. In 2022, expenditures in the national general public budget posted RMB26060.9 billion, increasing by 6.1 percent year on year, 5.8 percentage points higher than that in 2021. Specifically, expenditures in the central government’s general public budget and local general public budget increased by 3.9 percent and 6.4 percent year on year, respectively. In terms of the expenditure structure, expenditures related to health and social security and employment grew quickly, increasing by 17.8 percent and 8.1 percent year on year, respectively. 5. The employment situation remained generally stable. The surveyed urban unemployment rate declined. In 2022, 12.06 million people were newly employed, exceeding the original annual target of 11 million people. The national surveyed urban unemployment rate rose in some months due to factors such as COVID-19, with an annual average of 5.6 percent. The job market for major groups improved. The number of rural migrants in 2022 registered 295.62 million, up3.11 million from last year. The surveyed unemployment rate for youth continued to decline since Q3, posting 16.7 percent in December and decreasing by 3.2 percentage points below its peak in July. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt According to preliminary statistics, in 2022 China’s current account surplus registered USD417.5 billion, accounting for 2.3 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and remaining within a reasonable range. Specifically, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD685.6 billion, increasing by 22 percent year on year. Trade in services recorded a deficit of USD94.3 billion, decreasing by 6 percent year on year. Cross-border two-way investments remained generally stable and orderly. Direct investments witnessed a net inflow of USD32.3 billion, keeping the surplus of recent years. Specifically, outward direct investments registered USD158 billion. Enterprises went global in a stable and orderly manner. Foreign direct investments registered USD190.3 billion. China remained appealing to international long-term capital. As of the end of September 2022, the balance of full-caliber foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2481.5 billion. Specifically, the short-term external debt balance posted USD1355.6 billion, accounting for 55 percent of the total external debt balance. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In December 2022, among 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 2.3 percent and 3.8 percent year on year, respectively, down 4.3 percentage points and 4.8 percentage points, respectively, from last year. In 2022, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 24.3 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 26.7 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development fell by 10 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development fell by 9.5 percent year on year.At end-2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 1.5 percent year on year to RMB53.2 trillion. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 1.2 percent year on year to RMB38.8 trillion. Outstanding housing development loans grew by 2.1 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion. 7.2 Agriculture Strong agriculture is the basis of a strong socialist country, as it undergirds people’s livelihood, high-quality development, and national security. The top priority in building a strong agricultural country is to ensure a steady and safe supply of grain and other major agricultural products. In 2022, China’s grain production recorded an all-time high despite difficulties such as the sporadic outbreaks of COVID-19, the autumn floods in the north, the extreme droughts and heat waves in the south, and the high prices of materials for agricultural production. Total grain output registered 686.53 billion kilograms, up 0.5 percent or 3.68 billion kilograms year on year, remaining above 650 billion kilograms for the eighth years in succession. A bumper grain harvest underpinned the stability of the economy, expectations, and the overall situation. In spite of the hard-won achievements, the pressure cannot be overlooked. There are still multifaceted challenges in safeguarding food security. The first challenge is the resource and environmental constraints. Arable land per capita in China is less than 40 percent of the world’s average. This, coupled with the uneven distribution and generally low quality of arable land, puts a long-term limit on rational and effective use of arable land. The second challenge is the relative backwardness of agricultural technology and marketization. The variety selection and cultivation of most staple crops is conducted independently at home. However, some crops are still import-dependent due to the definite gap between China and countries with strong seed industries in terms of the quality and productivity of the crops. Problems concerning agricultural operations include small and scattered production, low level of market organization, as well as lack of a link between smallholders and modern agriculture. The third challenge is the highly import-dependent crops and overly concentrated source of imports. In 2021, more than 80 percent of the soybeans consumed in China were imported, 60 percent of which came from Brazil and 33 percent from the United States; and 9.2 percent of the corn consumed was imported, mostly from the United States and Ukraine, with a growing dependence on imports in recent years. Against the backdrop of intensified geopolitical conflicts, global agriculture and food supply experiences shocks and there will possibly be greater fluctuations in the prices of agricultural commodities, thus presenting challenges tosafeguarding national food security. The fourth challenge is the increase in extreme weather events. It has been pointed out in a report by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other institutions that compared with the 1980s and 1990s, extreme weather events, such as droughts and heat waves, occurred much more frequently after 2009, crippling global food supplies. In recent years, the same phenomenon occurred in China, posing serious challenges to food security. The Report to the 20th CPC National Congress makes it clear that “we must reinforce the foundations for food security on all fronts”, which puts forward a higher requirement on safeguarding food security. Following the Plan for Promoting Agricultural and Rural Modernization during the 14th Five-Year Plan Period, China will prioritize arable land and seed, step up policy and technology support, and take firm control of the food supply with the following methods. First, the area of arable land must be strictly guaranteed. China will ensure that the total area of farmland does not fall below the redline of 120 million hectares, and work to gradually develop all permanent basic cropland of about 104 million hectares into high-standard cropland. The agricultural layout will be balanced, with land and production guaranteed for major grain-producing areas, major grain-sales areas, and areas that coordinate grain production and sales. Mechanisms will be improved for subsidizing grain farmers and major grain-producing areas. Second, seed security must be strengthened. Seeds are crucial to food security. Therefore, it is important to establish a modern seed industry, to enhance the capability of protecting and utilizing seed resources, to strengthen the construction of seed banks, to improve the capacity for innovation in breeding, variety testing, and seed cultivation, and to facilitate the industrialization of biological breeding. Third, reform of agricultural modernization and marketization must be deepened. The reform of agricultural prices will go deeper to build an agricultural market characterized by an improved subsidy scheme, better financial services, enhanced policy insurance systems, and greater support for new types of agricultural businesses. Fourth, development driven by technology and reform must be accelerated. Led by core and key technologies and guided by urgent industrial needs, the development of agriculture will center on fundamental technologies, core seed sources, crucial agricultural equipment, and other areas. Research resources at all levels will be integrated and enterprises will play a more dominant role in scientific innovation so as to build a technological innovation system for agriculture featuring a clear structure, rational divisions, and moderate competition. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy The year 2022 is extremely important in the history of the CPC and the Chinesenation. The successful convening of the 20th CPC National Congress marks the beginning of a new journey toward building a modern socialist country in all respects and achieving the second centenary goal. Against the backdrop of the complex and rapidly changing international environment and the arduous task of promoting reform and development at home, under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, China has coordinated COVID-19 containment and social and economic development, strengthened macro policy adjustments, addressed the impact of factors exceeding expectations, and maintained overall economic and social stability. The achievements have not come easily. In 2022, China’s GDP grew by 3.0 percent year on year, with economic aggregates exceeding RMB120 trillion. The number of newly employed people reached 12.06 million, exceeding the target of 11 million. Prices remained stable against the backdrop of high global inflation, with the CPI recording year-on-year growth of 2.0 percent in 2022. The overall performance of the Chinese economy was stable in Q4. In Q4 2022, China’s GDP grew by 2.9 percent year on year, demonstrating the resilience of economic performance. The output of autumn grain was stable with a slight rise, and the “Chinese rice bowl” was held more firmly. Industrial production has overcome the impact of COVID-19 and maintained positive growth, with the output of green products, such as new-energy vehicles and solar cells, growing by over 50 percent. The income of residents grew steadily, and consumption momentum was constantly accumulated. Investment in infrastructure grew rapidly, and investment in technological transformation in the manufacturing sector increased with policy support, jointly playing an important role in stabilizing growth. The structure of foreign trade continued to improve, and the proportion of imports and exports of private enterprises increased by 2.3 percentage points, compared with the previous year. Looking ahead to 2023, the overall economy is expected to pick up and economic circulation will be smoother. First, China will stick to economic development as the central task and it will adhere to the “two unswerving rules” and opening wider to the outside world on all fronts, which will help boost the confidence of economic entities and stabilize market expectations. Second, optimization of COVID-19 containment has had a significantly positive impact on sustained economic recovery, and the order of production and life will be restored at an accelerated pace. Third, full implementation of the package of policies and follow-up measures to stabilize the economy introduced in 2022 will continue to unleash the effects of driving physical quantity and economic growth. We should also note that the current external environment remains severe and complex, and the foundation for a domestic economic recovery is not yet solidified. From an international perspective, geopolitical conflicts are still ongoing, the momentum for global economic growth is weakening, inflation in the developed economies remains elevated, and the interest rate hikes have not yet ended. All of thiswill had a deeper impact on the Chinese economy. From the domestic perspective, the disturbances brought about by the evolution of COVID-19 still require attention, the momentum of household savings shifting to consumption remains to be seen, the shift in the real estate industry to the new development model will take time, and local governments will continue to face pressures from balancing fiscal revenues and expenditures. In addition, the fading demographic dividends and the promotion of a green transition also pose medium- and long-term challenges. In this regard, we must face up to the difficulties while maintaining a strategic focus. The key is to focus on accomplishing our own tasks. Taken together, the Chinese economy is highly resilient, promising, and energetic. The fundamentals for China’s sound economic growth over the long run remain unchanged. We need to strengthen our confidence in economic work, comprehensively deepen the reform and opening-up, focus on expanding domestic demand, maintain stability of foreign trade and investment, and consolidate and expand the momentum for an economic recovery. On the whole, inflation is expected to remain moderate, but we should also be alert to a rebound in inflationary pressures in the future. In 2022, the CPI in China rose by 2.0 percent year on year, while PPI growth declined quarter by quarter and rose by 4.1 percent year on year. During the past five or ten years, China has kept the average annual growth of CPI at around 2 percent, achieving a hard-won price stability in the face of internal and external challenges. Looking ahead, inflationary pressures are generally under control for the short term. The Chinese economy is still in the process of recovery and development, and insufficient effective demand remains to be the principal contradiction. The industrial and supply chains are operating smoothly, and PPI growth is expected to remain at a low level on the whole. In the medium- and long-term, there are favorable conditions for keeping price levels generally stable. Supply and demand in the Chinese economy is generally balanced, monetary policies remain sound and prudent, and household inflation expectations are stable. In the meantime, we should also pay attention to the uncertainties in future domestic price trends. The consumption momentum may gradually increase after optimization of the COVID-19 containment. During the Spring Festival holiday in 2023, domestic tourism revenue increased by 30 percent year on year, and the number of passengers during the Spring Festival travel season rose by over 50 percent year on year. Economic vitality has been further unleashed, enterprises are accelerating resumption of work and full production, and recovery of the labor market is speeding up, which may affect future wage changes. The cumulative effects of various policies are gradually emerging. Inflation is stubborn in the major developed economies, and there is pressure from the upward trend in commodity prices. High inflation overseas is likely to be transmitted to China through links such as production and distribution. We should strengthen monitoring and analysis and keep an eye on a rebound in inflationary pressures. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, guided by Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will thoroughly study and implement the guidelines of the 20th CPC National Congress and the Central Economic Work Conference. Following the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully, and comprehensively, and play its part in accelerating the building of a new development paradigm and advancing Chinese modernization. It will adopt a strategic perspective, starting by improving social expectations and boosting confidence in achieving development. Pursuing a holistic approach, it will enhance coordination in the six aspects as required by the Central Economic Work Conference, making sure that implementation of the strategy to expand domestic demand is integrated with efforts to deepen the supply-side structural reform. Meanwhile, the PBOC will intensify macro adjustments, and develop a modern central banking system, and fully explore the efficacy of monetary and credit policies with a focus on stabilizing growth, employment, and prices. It will provide financial support for the real economy to effectively upgrade and appropriately expand economic output so that the journey toward a modern socialist country in all respects will get off to a good start. The PBOC will pursue a sound monetary policy in a targeted and forceful manner. While ensuring proper intertemporal adjustments, it will back efforts to expand domestic demand to further ramp up support for the real economy, and, at the same time, it will balance short-term and long-term goals, economic growth and price stability, as well as internal and external equilibria. The PBOC will resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies to consolidate sustainable support for the real economy. It will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, maintain effective growth of credit aggregates, and ensure that the growth rates of M2 and the AFRE continue to be basically in line with nominal economic growth, aiming for an overall effect of boosting consumption, expanding investment, and bolstering employment. Using the structural monetary policy tools in a targeted, appropriate, and flexible manner, the PBOC will guide financial institutions to enhance their financial services for such fields as inclusive finance, sci-tech innovation, and green development so as to foster a strong recovery of consumption and to reinforce the potential for economic growth. Additionally, policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments will be further brought into play to better stimulate effective investments. The PBOC will continue to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform. It will optimize the central bank policy rate system, give play to the important role of the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments, and tap into the LPR reform and the LPR’s guiding role. With these efforts, the costs for business financing and for consumer credit are expected to decline. Keeping a close watch oninflation development, it will provide support to ensure sufficient supplies and stable energy and grain prices to keep prices basically stable. Pursuing a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies and upholding the decisive role of the market in exchange rate formation, the PBOC will enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and improve expectation management so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Meanwhile, it will coordinate efforts to provide financial support for the real economy and to prevent risks, and it will take steady steps to defuse risks, such as those associated with key conglomerates and small and medium-sized financial institutions. The PBOC will maintain overall stability in the financial system and defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. First, the PBOC will maintain reasonable and stable growth in money and credit. By using a mix of monetary policy tools, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and ensure that the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE continue to be basically in line with nominal economic growth. It will support financial institutions meeting the effective financing needs of the real economy based on market principles and the rule of law, and it will make the growth of credit aggregates more stable and sustainable. Closely following economic and financial developments at home and abroad as well as the monetary policy shifts of the major central banks, the PBOC will strengthen monitoring and analysis of liquidity supply and demand and financial market movements so as to conduct open market operations in a flexible manner and further improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of operations. Second, the PBOC will bring into play the roles of structural monetary policy tools in motivating and guiding financial institutions. It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable to continue providing inclusive and sustainable funding support to agro-related businesses, micro and small businesses (MSBs), and private businesses. It will effectively implement the inclusive MSB lending facility to keep up financial support for MSBs and to back efforts to stabilize businesses and to secure employment. It will carry on implementation of the carbon emission reduction facility and special central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal, which encourage eligible financial institutions to provide funding at preferential interest rates to key projects that significantly reduce carbon emissions and in support of clean and efficient use of coal as well as coal-fired power. The PBOC will make effective use of special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and that for equipment upgrading to meet the relevant credit demand from the manufacturing sector, social services sectors, micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), and self-employed traders. Furthermore, it will continue to implement special central bank lending for inclusive elderly care services and that for transport and logistics sectors, put into operation facilities supporting interest rate cuts for inclusive MSB loans andtoll road loans, and move forward with implementation of the loan support scheme aimed at ensuring timely deliveries of presold homes. Third, the PBOC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. Continued efforts will be made to advance the project for enhancing the ability to provide financial services for MSMEs. The PBOC will guide financial institutions to accelerate the establishment of the long-term mechanism for boosting the confidence, willingness, capacity, and professionalism of financial institutions to lend to MSBs, and it will optimize the effectiveness assessment of the MSB credit policy orientation to further improve the quality and efficiency of financial services for MSBs. Focusing on the key fields of rural revitalization, the PBOC will ensure the provision of effective financial services for the production of grain and important agricultural products, step up financial support for revitalizing the seed industry, and maintain support for the efforts to advance rural revitalization across the board and to accelerate building up China’s strong agriculture. Additionally, the PBOC will push for quicker payments from policy-based and development-oriented financial instruments and timely issuances of supporting loans, and it will strengthen management of the existing facilities so that the funded projects will play their roles in boosting investment and stabilizing the macro economy. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBOC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance while taking concrete steps to ensure timely deliveries of presold homes, to secure the people’s livelihood, and to maintain stability. Moreover, it will meet reasonable financing needs of the real estate sector, promote restructurings, mergers, and acquisitions in the sector, and improve the balance sheets of the top high-quality developers. It will adopt city-specific measures to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, and it will offer home-related financial services to new urban residents and young people. All these efforts are aimed at ensuring the stable development of the real estate market. Fourth, the PBOC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms, and it will focus on domestic conditions while balancing internal and external equilibria. It will continue to advance the market-oriented interest rate reform and to smooth the channels for monetary policy transmission. It will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by optimizing the central bank policy rate system and guiding market rates to move around the policy rates. It will put into use the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments to stabilize bank liability costs. It will also tap into the LPR reform to help stabilize and bring down the financing costs for businesses and the costs ofconsumer credit for individuals. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBOC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. Letting the market play a decisive role in the formation of exchange rates, the PBOC will enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and strengthen expectation management. At the same time, it will uphold bottom-line thinking, duly conduct monitoring and analysis of cross-border capital flows, and stress risk prevention. By doing so, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level while giving play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. In addition, the PBOC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market. Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for MSMEs with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. Moreover, the PBOC will continue to advance RMB internationalization in an orderly manner. It will further expand use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepen international monetary cooperation, and promote the development of offshore RMB markets. It will carry on the pilot programs for high-standard opening-up of cross-border investment and trade, further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account and the institutional opening-up of financial markets. Fifth, the PBOC will make continued efforts to deepen the financial reforms, and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. The reform of development and policy financial institutions will move ahead, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based business management and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities so as to better play their important roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBOC will improve the legal system for the bond market and consolidate the legal basis for corporate credit bonds. It will accelerate the building of a multi-tiered bond market system and continue to expand the pilot programs for balance-based management and macro-prudential management of financial bonds. It will support the commercial banks in replenishing capital through multiple channels and improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment. Moreover, the PBOC will promote the development of the over-the-counter bond business in order to diversify the channels for bond investments, trading, custody, and settlement of small and medium-sized financial institutions, to increase bond market liquidity, and to contribute to the continuity and effectiveness of price formation in the secondary market. It will further improve the mechanisms for bond underwriting and market-making to enhance the synergy between the primary and secondary markets and the effectiveness of bondpricing as well as its function as a transmission channel. Adhering to market principles and the rule of law, the PBOC will continue to adopt a zero-tolerance approach by stepping up efforts to crack down on illegal and irregular conduct in the bond market. At the same time, it will remain firmly committed to advancing the opening-up of the bond market. Sixth, the PBOC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential policy framework as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning. It will also enrich the macro-prudential policy tools and steadily expand the coverage of the macro-prudential policy. The PBOC will improve regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will urge systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. Meanwhile, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve their total loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention ability. The PBOC will conduct access management of financial holding companies in a prudent and orderly manner. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate them, and the relevant regulatory system will be continuously improved to promote the sound, well-regulated, and sustainable development of financial holding companies. The PBOC will work toward more effective regulation, enhancing prudential regulation and conducting regulation of the financial sector on an on-going basis, and strengthen protection of consumers and investors. Furthermore, it will strengthen the financial legal system. More work will be done to improve and consolidate long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution in order to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is based on market principles and the rule of law. Meanwhile, the PBOC will keep a close watch on risks in key fields. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it will reduce existing risks and strictly guard against emerging risks while tightening prevention and control of financial and local debt risks. Additionally, the PBOC will further tap into the functions of deposit insurance for early corrections and risk resolution, continuously improve its abilities of risk monitoring and early warning, leverage the role of risk-differentiated premiums as both incentives and restraints, and enhance the authority of early corrections. Solid efforts will be made to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement corresponding measures. The PBOC will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards. It will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur.