Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and has implemented the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. It has kept its sound monetary policy flexible and appropriate, and it has given full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy instruments. Money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) have grown reasonably, the credit structure has improved continuously, and overall financing costs have steadily declined, with financial support for the real economy continuously enhanced. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has given top priority to the stability of monetary policy, made progress while maintaining stability, and taken quick measures at an early stage based on developments of the macro situations. It has adopted a mix of tools, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, turning over profits, the Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs) to provide liquidity. It has also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner and has kept liquidity in the banking system adequate at a reasonable level. In January 2022, the PBC guided both OMO rates and MLF rates to go down by ten basis points. Short-term interest rates in the money market floated around the OMO rates with a further decline in its volatility, which provided proper liquidity for stabilizing the macro economy and keeping the economic indicators within a reasonable range. At end-March 2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.7 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year. II. Lending by financial institutions grew moderately, and loan interest rates decreased further Stability of total credit growth was enhanced. In response to the implications of uncertainties at home and abroad, the PBC took proactive and quick measures at an early stage. It guided financial institutions to grant loans in a reasonable manner, facilitating a year-on-year acceleration of loans in Q1 2022 and thereby providing a robust back for stabilizing the macro economy. At end-March, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 11.0 percent year on year to RMB207.0 trillion, an increase of RMB8.5 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB466.3 billion. Outstanding RMB-denominated loans grew 11.4 percent year on year to RMB201.0 trillion, up RMB8.3 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB663.6 billion. The credit structure improved continuously. At end-March, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB3.9 trillion from the beginning of the year, accounting for 55.8 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year （YOY） growth of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 29.5 percent, 18.1 percentage points higher than the growth of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) grew by 24.6 percent year on year to RMB20.8 trillion. These loans supported 50.39 million MSBs, a rise of 42.9 percent year on year.Box 1 Remarkable Progress in Improving the Modern Monetary Policy Framework Improving the modern monetary policy framework is an important part of building a modern central banking system. It serves as an institutional base for implementing the sound monetary policy well and for conducting an intertemporal policy design, and it also satisfies the intrinsic need to promote high-quality development. In recent years, improvements in the modern monetary policy framework have made remarkable progress. According to the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC has improved the mechanism for money supply management, enhanced the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, innovated and expanded the system of monetary policy instruments, and optimized the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism. First, the mechanism for money supply management has been improved. According to the guidelines of the Central Economic Work Conference and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government, growth of broad money (M2) and outstanding AFRE should match the nominal economic growth. The PBC has precisely identified banks as the direct subject of money supply, and it has improved the mechanism for money supply management by bringing into shape longterm mechanisms for liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints. It comprehensively utilizes a wide array of monetary policy instruments to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and to alleviate liquidity constraints. From 2018 to 2021, the average growth of M2 in China was 9 percent. The PBC has seen perpetual bonds as a breakthrough in motivating banks to replenish capital via multiple channels so as to ease capital constraints. In January 2019, the first perpetual bond of the banking sector was issued. As of end-March 2022, banks have cumulatively issued RMB1.8915 trillion worth of perpetual bonds, motivating banks to issue loans of approximately RMB10 trillion. Overall corporate financing costs have dropped steadily, which has eased interest rate constraints. The weighted average interest rate on loans to enterprises gradually declined to 4.36 percent in March 2022, a record low since statistics became available. From 2018 to 2021, the average growth of M2 was virtually on par with the nominal GDP growth of 8.3 percent over the same period. This has contributed to the long-term optimized combination of economic growth, price stability, and full employment. Second, the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism has been enhanced. In line with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, in August 2019 the PBC released a notice on the reform and improvement of the loan prime rate (LPR) formation mechanism. The reformed LPR is based on market-oriented quotes by panel banks that take into account the trend in market rates with reference to the MLF rate. This has not only made loan rates more market-based but it has also developed a transmission mechanism featuring “market rates+central bank’s guidance→LPR→loan rates,” making monetary policy transmission much more efficient. At present, the pricing of new loans basically uses the LPR as the benchmark, and the shift to the LPR as the pricing benchmark was completed in August 2020 for outstanding floating-rate loans. Meanwhile, the PBC continues to optimize regulation of deposit rates. In June 2021, it guided the selfregulatory mechanism for interest rates to modify the self-regulated ceiling of deposit rates by adding a margin to the benchmark interest rates. The PBC has strengthened regulation of non-standard deposit innovation products and has maintained orderly competition in the deposit market. In April 2022, it guided the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rates to establish a market-oriented adjustment mechanism of deposit rates, and it motivated banks to reasonably adjust deposit rates in accordance with the changes in market rates, which made deposit rates more market-oriented. In terms of effectiveness, since the LPR reform in August 2019, the weighted average rates on enterprise loans has declined from 5.32 percent in July 2019 to 4.36 percent in March 2022, or a cumulative drop of 0.96 percentage points, higher than the 0.55 percentagepoint drop in the LPR over the same period. This has effectively promoted an ongoing notable drop in the real loan rates and has largely eased the financing difficulties long faced by the MSBs and has lowered their financing costs. Third, the system of monetary policy instruments has been innovated and improved. The PBC has accommodated the intrinsic need for high-quality development, attached importance to introducing an incentive compatibility mechanism, innovated and applied structural monetary policy instruments, and guided financial institutions to step up support for relevant areas in line with the new development concept. Since 2018, it has cut the reserve requirement ratio (RRR) for 13 times, releasing long-term funding worth approximately RMB10.8 trillion. At endApril 2022, the average RRR for financial institutions stood at 8.1 percent, 6.8 percentage points lower than that at the beginning of 2018. Instruments such as central bank lending and discounts have been adopted. At the beginning of 2021, an additional RMB200 billion of central bank lending was made available to ten provinces (regions) with slow credit growth. To promote coordinated regional development, the PBC adopted a multi-pronged approach when guiding financial institutions to provide more credit to regions with slow credit growth. In November 2021, the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coal were launched in parallel to precisely promote green and low-carbon development. Since January 1, 2022, the two monetary policy instruments that directly support the real economy have been converted into market-oriented policy instruments in support of MSBs. In particular, the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans was converted into an instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans. For inclusive MSB loans issued by eligible locally incorporated banks, the PBC offers incentive funds, which are 1 percent of the increment in the MSB loan balance. The support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans was incorporated into management of central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs. The RMB400 billion central bank lending originally arranged to support inclusive unsecured MSB loans can be rolled over. Recently, special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and inclusive elderly care has been launched to motivate financial institutions to step up support for these two areas. At end-March 2022, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs was RMB20.8 trillion, 2.5 times that at the beginning of 2018. These loans supported 50.39 million MSBs, 2.2 times that at end-2018. The weighted average interest rate on new inclusive loans to MSBs posted 4.93 percent in 2021, a drop of 0.22 percentage points from 2020 and of 1.38 percentage points from 2018. Fourth, the market-oriented reform of the RMB exchange rate has been advanced so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC has exited from regular interventions in the foreign exchange market, and market supply and demand now play a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate. While giving play to the exchange rate as a pricing signal, it has enhanced the efficiency of resource allocation. The PBC has stuck to the market-oriented reform, enhanced the RMB exchange rate flexibility, given play to the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer for the macro economy and the balance of payments, and promoted a balance between internal and external equilibria. The PBC has established and has continuously improved macro-prudential management for cross-border financing, employed instruments such as the RRR for foreign currency deposits, and guided financial institutions to optimize management of foreign exchange assets. It has guided enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, enhanced expectation management, and maintained the smooth operation of the foreign exchange market. Since 2018, the RMB exchange rate has withstood a variety of major external shocks with enhanced flexibility and it has played its role as an automatic stabilizer for the macro economy and the balance of payments. The RMB exchange rate has witnessed appreciations and depreciations, moving in both directions and remaining basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. From 2018 to 2021, there were 973 trading days on China’s foreign exchange market, during which the central parity of the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar appreciated on 485 days, depreciated on 487 days, and remained unchanged on one day. At end-March 2022, the central parity RMB exchange rate against the US dollar was 6.3482, appreciating 0.4 percent compared with the end of the previous year. Going forward, the PBC will continue to improve the framework for a modern monetary policy, promote high-quality development, and accelerate the building of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulation reinforcing each other. Loan interest rates decreased further. Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has continuously deepened the market-oriented reform of interest rates. It has tapped into the effects of the LPR reform and given play to its role in guiding interest rates, thereby enhancing competition in the credit market. In the meantime, the PBC has improved regulation of deposit rates, promoted a further drop in actual loan rates, and guided financial institutions to cut profits in favor of the real economy. In March, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.70 percent and 4.60 percent, respectively, down 0.10 percentage point and 0.05 percentage point from December 2021, respectively. In March, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.65 percent, down 0.45 percentage point year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.98 percent, down 0.32 percentage point year on year, while that on corporate lending fell by 0.27 percentage point year on year to 4.36 percent. In March, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 66.95 percent, 7.63 percent, and 25.42 percent, respectively. Compared with end-2021, as a whole, the floating range of RMB loan rates around the LPR moved downward. Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In March, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on largevalue USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 0.12 percent and 0.53 percent, respectively, up 0.02 and 0.22 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USDdenominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six months registered 1.40 percent and 1.54 percent, respectively, up 0.29 percentage poinst and 0.43 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. Deposits grew steadily. At end-March, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies of all financial institutions increased 9.9 percent year on year to RMB249.7 trillion, up RMB11.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB2.3 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 10.0 percent year on year to RMB243.1 trillion, an increase of RMB10.9 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB2.5 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD1.0 trillion, an increase of USD49.4 billion from the beginning of 2022 and a deceleration of USD18.1 billion.III. Money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy grew at a reasonable pace Money and credit aggregates maintained reasonable growth, providing strong support for the real economy. Outstanding M2 recorded RMB249.8 trillion at end-March, increasing 9.7 percent year on year. Outstanding M1 and M0 registered RMB64.5 trillion and RMB9.5 trillion, respectively, increasing 4.7 percent and 9.9 percent year on year. The first quarter of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB431.7 billion, which was RMB208.8 billion more than that in the same period of the previous year. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB325.64 trillion at end-March. Year-on-year growth registered 10.6 percent, up 0.3 percentage points compared with the growth recorded at end-2021. The AFRE increment in Q1 2022 totaled RMB12.06 trillion, an increase of RMB1.77 trillion year on year. Growth of money supply and the AFRE featured the following: first, RMB loans witnessed a significantly larger year-on-year increase. In Q1, RMB loans issued to the real economy increased by RMB8.34 trillion, RMB425.8 billion more as compared to the same period of 2021. Second, government bonds, corporate bonds, and domestic equity financing by non-financial enterprises exhibited a larger year-on-year increase, RMB923.8 billion, RMB405 billion, and RMB51.5 billion more than those in the corresponding period of the previous year, respectively. Third, trust loans recorded a smaller year-on-year decrease, while undiscounted bankers’ acceptances registered a smaller year-on-year increase. In Q1, the year-on-year increase of entrusted loans was RMB51 billion more than that in Q1 2021; the year-on-year decrease of trust loans was RMB187.9 billion less than that in Q1 2021; and the year-on-year increase of undiscounted bankers’ acceptances was RMB245.4 billion less than that in Q1 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions witnessed a larger year-on-year decrease, while loans written off exhibited a larger year-on-year increase. IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level Since the beginning of 2022, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and market expectations have been generally stable. The market has played a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, and the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In Q1, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate appreciated modestly against a basket of currencies. At end-March, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 104.28 and 102.11, respectively, both up 1.8 percent from end-2021. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end-2021 to endMarch 2022, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB appreciated 2.2 percent and 0.6 percent, respectively, and from 2005 when reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism began to endMarch 2022, appreciation of the NEER and the REER of the RMB registered 52 percent and 59.1 percent, respectively. In Q1, the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar witnessed a slight appreciation. At end-March, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.3482, appreciating 0.4 percent from end-2021 and 30.4 percent on a cumulative basis since the reform of the exchange rate formation mechanism in 2005. In Q1, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 2.9 percent. In Q1, cross-border RMB settlements increased 8 percent year on year to RMB9.7 trillion, with RMB receipts and payments posting RMB4.8 trillion and RMB4.9 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 23 percent year on year to RMB2.1 trillion, among which RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB1.6 trillion, whereas RMB settlements of trade in services and under other items registered RMB478.3 billion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB7.6 trillion, increasing 5 percent year on year. Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q1 2022, with resolute implementation of the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, and in line with the requirements for pursuing stability as the top priority and seeking progress while ensuring stability, the PBC placed emphasis on the foresightedness of policy measures, kept the sound monetary policy flexible and appropriate, enhanced intertemporal adjustments, gave full play to the dual functions of monetary policy tools in adjusting the credit aggregate and structure, kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, strengthened stability of aggregate credit growth, further brought down actual lending rates from a relatively low basis, and guided financial institutions to ramp up support for the real economy, especially micro and small businesses (MSBs), tech innovation, and green development, thereby forcefully contributing to stabilizing the entire macro economy. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. In Q1, the PBC strengthened the monitoring and analysis of factors affecting liquidity supply and demand, such as cash injections during the Spring Festival, government bond issuances, and quarter-end regulatory assessments as well as development of COVID-19. The central bank made intertemporal arrangements, conducted open market operations in a flexible manner, and kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. Before the Spring Festival, it launched 14-day reverse repos in time to release cross-festival liquidity, and it managed the operation volume in a flexible manner so as to offset short-term disruptions, such as a cash injection peak, and to meet the institutions’ cross-festival demand for liquidity. Meanwhile, by basically aligning the matured reverse repos with cash flowing back to the banking system after the Spring Festival, the PBC sought a balance of fund supply and demand, which was neither tight nor loose. After the Spring Festival, with comprehensive considerations of changes in market circumstances and expectations at home and abroad as well as with respect to COVID-19 and other factors, the central bank conducted reverse repo operations on a daily basis in the open market, and it managed the intensity and pace of these operations in a flexible manner so as to iron out short-term fluctuations, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and stabilize market expectations. Guiding market rates to move stably around central bank policy rates. On January 17, the rates paid on the 1-year Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF) and the 7-day open-market operations both declined by 10 basis points to 2.85 percent and 2.10 percent, respectively, which was conducive to uplifting market confidence and to promoting a decline in overall financing costs. This demonstrated that the monetary policy measures were being taken in a proactive and foresighted manner. In Q1, the PBC guided market rates to stably move around the lowered open market operation rates and the MLF rates, and it realized the interest rate management goals. Money market rates remained stable during the Spring Festival season and at end-March. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q1 2022, the PBC conducted CBS operations on three occasions, with the total amount registering RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized banks, and in strengthening the credit supply capacities of small and medium-sized banks.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q1 2022, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, the RMB-denominated central bank bill repos market developed further, with the scope of the institutional participants continuously expanding. The regular issuance of central bank bills and the development of the central bank bill repos market in Hong Kong enriched the scope of RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in Hong Kong, which played an active role in promoting the sound development of the offshore RMB money market and bond market and in propelling both domestic and overseas market entities to issue RMB-denominated bonds and to conduct RMB business in the offshore market. II. Conducting Medium-term Lending Facility and Standing Lending Facility operations in a timely manner Conducting MLF operations in a timely manner. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and interest rate guiding functions of medium-term policy rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1.20 trillion of MLF operations in Q1 2022, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.85 percent, 0.1 percentage points lower than that at end-2021. At endMarch, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.95 trillion, RMB400 billion more than that at the beginning of 2022. Further advancing the reforms of electronic SLF operations. The entire process of conducting SLF operations became electronic in an orderly manner, which boosted operational efficiency. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations, strengthen the stability of liquidity in the banking system, and forestall liquidity risks. In Q1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB6.43 billion SLF operations. At end-March, the balance of SLF operations registered RMB1.26 billion. The SLF rate played a role as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor, and it promoted smooth operation of the money market. At end-March, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.95 percent, 3.10 percent, and 3.45 percent, respectively, with the rates 0.1 percentage points lower those at end-2021. III. Adjusting the required reserve ratio for financial institutions The required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered in an attempt to support the real economy and to promote the steady decline of overall financing costs. The PBC reduced the required reserve ratio by 0.25 percentage points, effective on April 25, 2022 (not applicable to financial institutions that had already implemented a required reserve ratio (RRR) of 5 percent). In order to ramp up support for MSBs as well as agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, urban commercial banks operating businesses within the province of registration and rural commercial banks implementing an RRR of over 5 percent enjoyed an additional RRR cut of 0.25 percentage points. The RRR reduction released about RMB530 billion of long-term funds, and after the RRR cut, the weighted average RRR for financial institutions stood at 8.1 percent. The purposes of the RRR cut were as follows. First, it aimed to optimize the funding structure of financial institutions, expand their sources of long-term stable funding, enhance their capabilities to allocate funds, and ramp up support for the real economy. Second, it aimed to guide financial institutions to make good use of the funds released from the RRR cut to support industries as well as micro, small, and mediumsized enterprises (MSMEs) that were hard hit by COVID-19. Third, the RRR cut lowered the funding costs for financial institutions by approximately RMB6.5 billion per year, which would promote a reduction in overall financing costs through the transmission of financial institutions. The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was lowered for financial institutions, and their foreign exchange allocation capabilities were enhanced. The PBC lowered the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by 1 percentage point, from 9 percent to 8 percent, effective on May 15, 2022, which would release around USD10 billion of foreign exchange liquidity.IV. Further improving the macro prudential management framework The role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) was given full play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In Q1 2022, the PBC further optimized the MPA assessment framework and guided financial institutions to enhance the stability of growth of credit aggregates and to ramp up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector and for green development. Administration on access of financial holding companies (FHCs) proceeded in a prudent and orderly manner. In March 2022, the PBC approved the establishment of China CITIC Financial Holdings (in preparation) and Beijing Financial Holdings Group. For a non-financial enterprise, establishing an FHC serves to effectively isolate the financial and non-financial business, prevent risk contagion, and facilitate wellregulated and sustainable development. Going forward, the PBC will, in accordance with the laws and regulations, proceed with the approval procedures for those FHCs whose applications have been accepted, and it will continue to promote other eligible enterprises to apply for FHC establishments in a prudent and orderly manner. Box 2 Regulating Financial Holding Companies from a Macro Prudential Perspective In recent years, some non-financial firms have entered the financial sector through investments or by establishing new companies. Some of them control various types of financial institutions and have features of financial holding companies (FHCs). Among them, some firms have been playing positive roles in providing financial services, enhancing the capital strength of financial institutions, and serving the real economy. But a small number of firms have controlled and extracted funds from financial institutions, resulting in an interplay of risks between financial and non-financial sectors. The CPC Central Committee and the State Council have reiterated the need to regulate cross-sector financial activities and the integration between industry and finance. In particular, FHCs should be subject to coordinated regulation to address regulatory shortfalls. In September 2020, with the release of the Decisions of the State Council on Implementing Access Management of Financial Holding Companies and the Trial Measures on Regulation of Financial Holding Companies, a general regulatory framework for FHCs was preliminarily established. It has been further improved with the release of detailed rules, such as the Interim Regulations on Filingbased Management of Directors, Supervisors, and Senior Executives of Financial Holding Companies. Given the fact that FHCs are usually large in scale and have diversified business lines, a complex organizational structure, and strong risk spillover effects, it is necessary to regulate them from a macro, holistic and systemic regulatory perspective, which comprises an important part of macro prudential management. By enhancing macro prudential management on FHCs, we can get hold of the overall status of operation and the comprehensive risk profiles of financial holding groups, promoting the wellregulated and sustainable development of FHCs and enhancing their capacity to serve the real economy. Based on the above considerations, efforts should be made to implement regulation of FHCs in the following respects. First, upholding the principle that finance is a franchise industry and ensuring good access management. If a non-financial firm has de facto control of two or more types of financial institutions, and asset scale of the financial institutions that are actually controlled reach a certain threshold, the firm should apply for approval to establish an FHC. The enterprise should place all its financial shares under unified management at the FHC, and all financial activities should be conducted by the corresponding financial institutions affiliated with the FHC, thereby effectively separating industrial and financial activities. Second, upholding the look-through principle to enforce regulation of shareholders and the shareholder structure. FHCs should have a simple and clear ownership structure, in which the actual controllers and ultimate beneficiaries are transparent and identifiable. Major shareholders should have strong capital strength and well-regulated business operations, and the source of funds they invest in the FHC shall be real and legitimate. Third, enforcing consolidated regulation and focusing on the risks of groups, such as conflicts of interest, risk concentration, and risk contagion. FHCs and their affiliated financial institutions should be guided to maintain adequate capital, improve the governance structure at all corporate levels, and enforce the management of related party transactions. Fourth, specifying risk isolation requirements. FHCs should establish a risk isolation mechanism among the major shareholders, the FHC and its affiliated institutions, and among the affiliated institutions, and build a stronger “firewall” to prevent cross-sector, cross-institution, and cross-market risk contagions. Currently, work on access management and regulation of FHCs is making steady progress. In March 2022, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) approved the establishment of China CITIC Financial Holdings Company (in preparation) and the Beijing Financial Holdings Group. In addition, a number of eligible enterprises are applying for becoming FHCs, whereby they can ascertain their business lines and facilitate the separation of financial and non-financial activities. In particular, they shall ensure that the shareholders are eligible, and the organizational structure and relevant management meet the requirements for establishment. Going forward, the PBC will continue to uphold market-oriented and law-based principles, as well as the “Two Unwavering Commitments”. The PBC will speed up theformulation of supplementary rules for FHC regulation, take sound and orderly steps to promote eligible enterprises to submit applications to set up FHCs, proceed with the approval of FHCs in accordance with laws and regulations, and carry out continuous regulation of approved FHCs. The PBC will enhance regulatory cooperation and information sharing with the relevant authorities to promote sound operation of FHCs so as to better serve high-quality development of the real economy and help keep the major economic indicators within a reasonable range. The Notice on the Exclusion of Loans for Government-subsidized Rental Housing from Real Estate Loan Concentration Management was released. The PBC and the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (CBIRC) released the Notice on February 8, 2022, which clarifies that loans for government-subsidized rental housing projects shall be excluded from real estate loan concentration management. Banking institutions were encouraged to scale up support for government-subsidized rental housing in accordance with the laws and regulations, while pursuing sound risk management and commercial sustainability, so as to underpin the construction of a housing support system and the establishment of a housing system with diversified suppliers, multiple supporting channels, and a dual emphasis on both housing purchases and housing rentals. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development, central bank lending for MSBs, and central bank discounts to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and vulnerable spots in the national economy and for coordinated regional development. The PBC continued to leverage the role of central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and as a positive incentive. It contributed to connecting the consolidation of achievements in poverty eradication with rural revitalization. Central bank lending for supporting rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to the current regulations so as to support consolidation of the achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBC promoted coordinated regional development by guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces with slow credit growth to make good use of central bank lending and expand credit supply for vulnerable parts of the economy within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private businesses. More relief and assistance were provided for MSBs as the PBC guided locally incorporated financial institutions to utilize central bank lending for MSBs and to issue loans to MSBs and self-employed businesses heavily hit by mounting commodity prices and COVID-19, so as to reduce their financing costs. At end-March, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB516.1 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.3315 trillion and RMB171.3 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB624.7 billion. In Q1 2022, the PBC made net withdrawals of Pledged Supplementary Lending (PSLs) in the amount of RMB65.4 billion from development and policy banks, with outstanding PSLs registering RMB2.7363 trillion at end-March. Steadily advancing conversion of the two monetary policy instruments that directly support the real economy to bolster the development of MSBs. According to the decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council, the PBC converted the two instruments that provide direct support to the real economy into market-oriented instruments to strengthen support for MSBs. First, from 2022, the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans was incorporated into the management of central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs. The quota of RMB400 billion central bank lending originally arranged to support inclusive unsecured MSB loans will be rolled over, and locally incorporated banks will be encouraged to issue these loans. Second, the instrument supporting deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans has been converted into the instrument supporting inclusive MSB loans. From the beginning of 2022 to end-June 2023, for inclusive MSB loans issued by locally incorporated banks, the PBC will provide funding on a quarterly basis in the amount of 1 percent of the incremental balance of these loans so as to encourage banks to extend inclusive MSB loans. In Q1, the PBC provided RMB4.349 billion of funding to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increase of RMB436.6 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Continue implementing the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal, so as to support the green, low-carbon transition of the economy. Specifically, the CERF supports three major areas of carbon reduction: clean energy, energy conservation and environmental protection, and carbon reduction technology. The special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coal provides support in seven relevant areas, such as mass clean coal production and application of clean combustion technology. The quota of the special central bank lending was increased by RMB100 billion to support coal development and to use and boost the coal reserve capacity. Ensuring effective implementation of these two instruments and encouraging financial institutions to provide credit support for carbon emissions reductions and for the clean and efficient use of coal facilitate the transition to a green and low-carbon economy while ensuring security of the energy supply so as to contribute to the goal of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality in a scientific and orderly way. In Q1, through these two instruments, the PBC provided RMB53 billion and RMB19.8 billion, respectively, to relevant institutions, with a total of RMB72.8 billion. Since implementation of these instruments, the PBC has provided RMB138.6 billion and RMB22.5 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB161.1 billion. Establishing special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation and inclusive elderly care to help build a robust country through sci-tech development and to help address population aging. To implement the decisions made at the State Council’s executive meetings, with the aim of providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives and in line with market-oriented principles, the PBC established two special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation and for inclusive elderly care. The facility for sci-tech innovation supports new- and high-tech enterprises, small and medium-sized enterprises with technical know-how, sophisticated operations, unique products, and innovative capabilities, national model enterprises for technological innovation, and champion enterprises in particular areas of the manufacturing sector. The facility for inclusive elderly care supports eligible institutions providing inclusive elderly care services. A pilot program has been carried out in five provinces including Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Henan, Hebei, and Jiangxi. In April, the PBC, the Ministry of Science and Technology, and the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology jointly issued the Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for Sci-Tech Innovation (Yinfa No.104 [2022]). The PBC and the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) jointly issued the Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for Inclusive Elderly Care (Yinfa No.107 [2022]). Both facilities adopt a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a quarterly basis. Specifically, financial institutions are subject to their own decisionmaking at their own risk, and they can apply for funding support under the special central bank lending facilities after they grant loans to eligible enterprises in relevant industries. For qualified loans, the PBC provides low-cost funding for a certain proportion of the principal through central bank lending facilities. The “reimbursement” proportions of central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and for inclusive elderly care are 60 percent and 100 percent, respectively. The interest rate is 1.75 percent for both. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reforms The quality and efficiency of financial services to MSMEs have been improving. Financial support to stabilize businesses and secure employment was further stepped up, the Project for Enhancing Capacity to Provide Financial Services for MSMEs was further advanced, while the establishment of a long-term mechanism whereby banks will have the confidence, willingness, ability, and professionalism to provide loans to MSMEs was further accelerated, aiming to guide financial institutions to improve their internal resource allocations and policy arrangements and to strengthen employment of sci-tech tools so as to sustainably improve financial services to MSMEs. As of endMarch, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 24.6 percent year on year to RMB20.8 trillion. These loans supported 50.39 million MSBs, up 42.9 percent year on year. The interest rate on new inclusive loans to MSBs posted 4.93 percent in March, dropping by 17 basis points from December 2021. In February, the PBC, NDRC, and other related departments jointly released the Policies on Promoting the Recovery and Development of Industries with Difficulties in the Services Sector, which provide inclusive relief and assistance measures to businesses with difficulties in the services sector and increase preferential support for five industries in extreme difficulties, including catering, retail, tourism, transportation, and civil aviation. Financial services for rural revitalization were further promoted. The PBC conscientiously implemented the decisions and arrangements for promoting the rural revitalization strategy on all fronts and continuously enhanced the policy system of financial support for rural revitalization. The Opinions on Efforts to Ensure Key Financial Support for Promoting Rural Revitalization on All Fronts in the Year 2022 were issued, aiming to guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, enhance financial resource inputs to vital agricultural products, rural industries, rural construction, and other key areas, and promote the steady growth of agro-related loan issuances. The PBC continued to promote financial support to consolidate and expand the achievements of poverty eradication through efforts to guide financial institutions to provide preferential financial resources for regions that had been lifted out of poverty, such as key counties that receive assistance to pursue rural revitalization so as to maintain a stable pace of loan issuances to regions and populations that had shaken off poverty. As of end-March 2022, outstanding agro-related loans nationwide increased 12.2 percent year on year to RMB45.63 trillion. In particular, outstanding rural household loans increased by 12.9 percent year on year to RMB14.05 trillion. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform were continuously unleashed, while the regulations over deposit interest rates were improved, further bringing down actual loan rates. First, the LPR reform was further promoted, and the guiding role of the LPR was brought into play. As a result, actual corporate loan rates remained stable with a slight decline, and corporate financing costs were lowered significantly. Second, the regulations over deposit rates were further strengthened, with deposit rate pricing behavior for agreement deposits and other deposit products further regulated. In February 2022, the PBC guided the Self-regulatory Mechanism for Market Rate Pricing to release the Initiatives on Reinforcing Self-regulatory Management for Agreement Deposits, urging and guiding financial institutions to conduct agreement deposit businesses in compliance with the laws and regulations. In April, the deposit rate market-oriented adjustment mechanism was improved, further promoting the pricing of deposit rates in a more market-oriented manner. Third, conversion of the financial market benchmark rate from the LIBOR in domestic markets was actively promoted. From January 1, 2022, some of the LIBOR businesses stopped quotations or lost their representative nature as scheduled. In Q1, major domestic banks have already arranged conversion of the pricing benchmark for all businesses affected by the LIBOR expiration, while most of the new foreign-currency-denominated floating rate businesses in the domestic market have switched their benchmark from the LIBOR to other alternative benchmark rates. Box 3 Establishing a Market-oriented Adjustment Mechanism for Deposit Interest Rates In October 2015, the PBC removed administrative control over deposit interest rates, and members of the Interest Rate Self-regulatory Mechanism (IRSRM) could autonomously set deposit rates within the self-regulatory ceiling of deposit interest rates. In June 2021, the PBC guided the IRSRM to optimize the formation mechanism of the self-regulatory ceiling of deposit interest rates, shifting from multiplying the benchmark deposit rates by a designated multiplier to adding basis points to the benchmark interest rates. This move has not only protected the autonomy of banks in pricing their deposit rates but also has been conducive to lowering the medium and long-term deposit interest rates, improving the maturity structure of time deposits, promoting orderly market competition, as well as enhancing the sustainability of the financial sector’s support to the real economy. In March 2022, the weighted average interest rate for new time deposits stood at 2.37 percent, decreasing 0.08 percentage points year on year and 0.12 percentage points from May 2021 before the optimization. In particular, the interest rates for medium to long-term time deposits enjoyed a much larger decrease, with two-year, three-year, and five-year time deposit rates falling by 0.18, 0.43, and 0.45 percentage points from May 2021, respectively. Due to the fierce competitions in the deposit market, many banks in practice set their time deposit rates and certificate deposit (CD) rates close to the self-regulatory ceiling. This, to some extent, has hampered the effective transmission of market interest rates, making it very difficult for deposit rates to follow the changes in market rates. In April 2022, the PBC guided the IRSRM to establish a market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates, whereby member banks of the IRSRM can adjust their deposit rates according to the bond market rates (represented by the 10-year government bond yield) and the loan market rates (represented by the 1-year LPR). Establishment of this new mechanism will help banks closely follow changes in market rates and enhance their market-based pricing ability for deposit rates, while preserving a benign competition order in the deposit market. The key to setting up the market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit rates is to promote the market-based nature of deposit rate pricing, with flexible guidance to banks. Banks can autonomously determine the actual adjustment ranges to their deposit rates, according to their own circumstances and changes in market rates. For those financial institutions with timely and highly-efficient market-oriented adjustments for deposit rates, the PBC will offer appropriate incentive measures. After establishment of the new mechanism, the deposit rates of banks are priced in a more market-oriented manner, which, against the current backdrop of overall falling market rates, can help the banks maintain stable liability costs and thus further bring down actual loan rates. In practice, the ICBC, ABC, BOC, CCB, BCM, PSBC, and most of the joint stock banks, in late April had already lowered the rates for time deposits and CDs with maturities of over 1 year, and some locally-incorporated financial institutions also made corresponding adjustments. According to the latest survey data, in the last week of April (April 25 to May 1), the weighted average interest rate for new time deposits posted 2.37 percent, 10 basis points lower than that in the previous week. Going forward, the PBC will continue to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform, improve the formation and transmission mechanism for market-oriented interest rates, optimize the central bank policy rate system, strengthen regulations over deposit rates, strive to stabilize the liability costs of banks, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus bring down overall corporate financing costs . VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. It enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate and gave play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In Q1 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the USD were 6.3014 and 6.3800, respectively. During the 58 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 32 days and depreciated on 26 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 0.6 percent (394 bps) and 0.6 percent (364 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate appreciated against other major international currencies. At end-March, the central parities of the RMB against the dollar, the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen appreciated 0.4 percent, 1.9 percent, 3.2 percent, and 6.6 percent, respectively, from end-2021. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism that commenced in 2005 to end-March 2022, the RMB appreciated by a cumulative total of 30.4 percent, 41.4 percent, and 40.6 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of microeconomic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and investment. As of end-March, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and the foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB60.375 billion and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD496 million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions New achievements were made to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with total financial risks decreasing. Addressing the risks of high-risk groups was steadily advanced, and financial risks in key regions and areas were orderly mitigated. The reduction of high-risk institutions was continuously advanced, with the number decreasing notably. The PBC conducted stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions. The central bank rating of financial institutions in Q4 2021 was completed, with 4,398 banking financial institutions being rated throughout the nation. The rating results indicate that most institutions fell within the safety boundary (level 1 to level 7), and high-risk institutions (level 8 to D) dropped successively for six quarters, decreasing by more than half from the peak level. As of end-2021, there were no highrisk institutions in 11 provinces (municipalities or autonomous regions). A long-term mechanism to safeguard financial stability was established. To implement the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on forestalling and defusing financial risks and on improving the rule of law in the financial sector, and to establish a long-term mechanism to safeguard financial stability, the PBC drafted the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Financial Stability (Exposure Draft), which solicited public opinions in April. Box 4 Accelerating Legislation on Financial Stability In recent years, under the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the Financial Stability Development Committee (FSDC) under the State Council has coordinated and directed work at the forefront, and government departments and local authorities have made concerted efforts in fighting the tough battle of forestalling and defusing major financial risks and secured significant achievements. With long-accumulated risks effectively resolved, financial risks have been contained and on the whole have remained under control, thus reinforcing the foundation for financial stability and boosting the overall stable and sound development of the financial sector. At present, China is striding toward its second centenary goal. Based on the “two overall situations”, it is necessary to plan ahead by drafting the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Financial Stability (Exposure Draft), which began soliciting public opinions from April 6. The legislation on financial stability is essential and bears great significance. First, it implements the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on forestalling and defusing financial risks and on improving the rule of law in the financial sector, thus effectively safeguarding China’s economic and financial safety and social stability. Second, it summarizes experiences and practices proved effective in the tough battle against major financial risks and it establishes a long-term mechanism for safeguarding financial stability. Third, it establishes a legal system concerning financial stability with a holistic design and cross-departmental and cross-sectoral coordination, harmonizes scattered articles and principles, and sets regulatory standards for some important issues. The Law on Financial Stability (Exposure Draft) has 48 articles in six chapters, which are General Provisions, Financial Risk Prevention, Financial Risk Defusing, Financial Risk Resolution, Legal Liabilities, and Supplementary Provisions. The following are the priorities:First, improving the working mechanism for financial stability. Upholding the Party’s centralized and unified leadership, the mechanism for coordinating national financial stability and reform (the FSDC under the State Council) coordinates financial stability and reform and development, takes the lead in forestalling, defusing, and addressing major financial risks, and reports and reviews major issues according to procedures. Related financial regulatory departments and local authorities follow the division of work and the requirements of the FSDC and fulfill their duties on financial supervision and on forestalling, defusing and addressing financial risks. The Deposit Insurance Fund and industry protection funds perform their duties in monitoring and addressing risks to forge a bigger synergy to safeguard financial stability. Second, ensuring that related parties fulfill their responsibilities in forestalling, defusing. and addressing financial risks. Ensure that financial institutions, their main shareholders, and the actual controllers fulfill their primary responsibilities. Strengthen prudential management obligations of financial institutions, and intensify market access and regulatory requirements for the main shareholders and the actual controllers. Ensure that local governments fulfill their responsibilities within their jurisdictions to maintain financial stability and promptly take proactive actions to defuse regional financial risks. Ensure that financial regulatory departments tighten regulation and fulfill their responsibilities for risk prevention and control in the respective industries and areas by rigorously preventing, correcting, and addressing risks at an early stage. The PBC will act as the lender of last resort to ensure that no systemic financial risks arise. Third, specifying the arrangements of funds for addressing risks, which are fair and well-regulated, and featuring matched rights, responsibilities, and interests. The sequence of funds usage for resolving financial risks is outlined. Bail-outs are provided after the financial institutions' bail-in arrangements to reduce reliance on public funds. Failed institutions should conduct active bail-ins as the main shareholders and the actual controllers commit themselves to replenishing capital in line with the recovery and resolution plan or regulatory commitments, and the shareholders and actual controllers accountable for financial risks should fulfill their bail-in obligations in accordance with the law. Meanwhile, market-oriented funds are mobilized and channeled to the merger and restructuring of failed institutions, and the Deposit Insurance Fund and industry protection funds provide funding in accordance with the law. Local public resources are legally employed when financial risks endanger regional stability, and such risks are difficult to defuse after the exhaustion of marketoriented measures and the strict implementation of retrieving illegal gains and loss. When major financial risks that put financial stability in jeopardy, the Financial Stability Protection Fund provides funding support in line with the requirements to guard against moral hazards and to strictly enforce market discipline.Fourth, establishing the Financial Stability Protection Fund. The Fund is positioned to provide back-up funds to address China’s major financial risks that bear systemic significance. The Fund, coordinated and managed by the FSDC under the State Council, will be financed by financial institutions and financial infrastructure operators. It will also encompass funds from other sources as stipulated by the State Council. It is specified that the State Council will stipulate measures for the fundraising, management, and use of the Fund. The Fund, along with the Deposit Insurance Fund and industry protection funds comprise a “two-tier” system, and their coordination will buttress China’s financial safety net. Fifth, establishing a market- and law-based mechanism to resolve risks. Based on the actual resolution needs, a variety of measures are set with reference to international experience. These measures include but not limited to the execution of the right of operation and management, the transfer of assets and liabilities, the establishment of bridge banks and special purpose vehicles (SPVs), the suspension of close-out netting, the change of persons liable and claw-back of remunerations, the implementation of debt write-downs, equity write-downs, and debt-for-equity swaps, the suspension of overseas remittances and the repatriation of overseas assets, and the requirement to solicit support from parent groups by systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). Meanwhile, the sequence of equity write-downs and debt write-downs is specified, and in principle the gains of creditors and interest-related parties through risk resolution will not be lower than the gains through bankruptcy liquidation. Moreover, supporting arrangements for resolution are linked with the judicial process. Sixth, those who violate the laws and rules will be held accountable. It is specified that those who violate laws and regulations that lead to the outbreak and spread of financial risks will be held accountable in accordance with the law. It sets out the punishment for activities in violation of the laws and regulations amid the rise and resolution of financial risks by financial institutions, their major shareholders, and their actual controllers. Public officials who fail to perform their duties will be held accountable in accordance with the law. If they commit crimes, they will be held criminally responsible. In the next step, the PBC will work with the relevant authorities to fully incorporate public feedback into the revision of the draft law, and it will cooperate with the legislature on subsequent work in accordance with legislative procedures so as to release the Law on Financial Stability in due course. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scope, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main business, and give full play to their role in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthened risk prevention and control. X. Deepening reform of foreign exchange arrangements The coverage and quality of policies to facilitate trade-related foreign exchange payments and receipts of quality enterprises were enhanced. The policies were steadily expanded to cover more firms. These policies and measures were improved to expand the business scope and to enhance the filing requirements of banks and firms. During the first three months of 2022, six regions were newly added for such firms to conduct facilitated foreign exchange payments and receipts. By end-March, these facilitation policies were expanded to cover 32 regions, 146 banks, and 1,828 firms. The solid implementation of a pilot high-level opening up was advanced in key regions. Implementation of pilot policies on a high-level opening up of cross-border trade and investment was closely monitored in an attempt to streamline procedures in business operations, to lower the settlement costs of foreign exchange funds, and to boost the turnover of capital. By end-March 2022, 19 pilot banks had filed relevant materials in four regions, including Lin-gang Special Area of China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone, benefiting the pilot current account business in manufacturing, energy and chemical, high-tech industries and other industries. The overseas lending business by domestic banks was supported and regulated. In January 2022, the PBC and the SAFE released the Notice on the Overseas Lending Business by Banking Institutions (Yinfa No.27[2022]) to boost the coordinated management of banks’ overseas loans with cross-border guarantees and outbound direct investments. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In Q1 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates fluctuated around the interest rates of open market operations, featuring an overall downward movement and active market transactions. Bond issuances increased with a surge in local government bonds. The bond market witnessed active transactions, stable rates, and expanded term spreads. The stock market index went down, with increased turnover and decreased funds raised.I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates generally declined with active market transactions. In March 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 2.07 percent, and the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos posted 2.08 percent, 5 basis points higher and 1 basis point lower than those in December 2021, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.96 percent, 12 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos in the interbank market. At end-March, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 2.01 percent and 2.20 percent, respectively, down 12 and 7 basis points from end-2021, respectively. Market transactions were active. In Q1 2022, the volume of bond repos trading on the interbank market reached RMB287.9 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB4.8 trillion, up 29 percent year on year. The volume of cumulative trading in interbank lending registered RMB30.4 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB506.7 billion and a year-on-year increase of 4.4 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 85.4 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2 percentage points year on year, and overnight lending constituted 87.7 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, down 1.3 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 27.3 percent year on year to RMB96.6 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposit (CD) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In Q1 2022, about 6,866 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB5.4 trillion. The volume of trading on the secondary market totaled RMB47.9 trillion. At end-March, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.7 trillion. The weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.40 percent, 2 basis points lower than that of the 3-month Shibor. In Q1 2022, about 17,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB4.5 trillion, an increase of RMB700 billion year on year. Interest rate swap transactions witnessed a contraction. In Q1 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 55,000 transactions, decreasing 27.4 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB4.4 trillion, a decrease of 18.3 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB2.8 trillion, accounting for 64.4 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 87.8 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In Q1 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 302 transactions, with RMB50.36 billion of the notional principal, up 4.1 percent and 74.5 percent year on year, respectively. The interest rate option business developed steadily. The LPR option business was officially launched on the interbank market in March 2020 and the fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29, 2021. In Q1 2022, a total of 141 interest rate option transactions were concluded, totaling RMB19.994 billion, and all were interest rate cap/floor option transactions anchored to the LPR. 2. Rates of bonds were generally stable, while bond issuances expanded with active trading of spot bonds Coupon rates of bonds declined. In March 2022, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.81 percent, 1 basis point lower than that in December 2021. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 2.99 percent, 3 basis points lower than the rate in December 2021. There was one 1-year short-term financing bill (bond rating A-1, enterprises rating AAA) issued in March 2022, with a coupon rate of 2.06 percent, 101 basis points lower than the average rate in December 2021.Government securities yields went up before going down, with term spreads expanding. At end-March 2022, yields on 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year government securities decreased by 11 basis points, 4 basis points, and 4 basis points to 2.13 percent, 2.42 percent, and 2.57 percent from end-2021, respectively; yields on 7-year and 10-year government securities increased by 3 basis points and 1 basis point to 2.82 percent and 2.79 percent, respectively, from end-2021. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 66 basis points, expanding 13 basis points from end-2021. Bond issuances increased. In Q1 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 6.1 percent, or RMB869.6 billion, year on year to RMB15.0 trillion, driven mostly by surges in government bonds and debt-financing instruments issued by nonfinancial institutions. At end-March 2022, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB137.8 trillion, representing an increase of 14.8 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed rapid growth. In Q1 2022, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB69.7 trillion, registering an increase of 35.8 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank market was RMB61.7 trillion, representing an increase of 33.9 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB8 trillion, an increase of 51.8 percent year on year. 3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market were basically stableThe bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In Q1 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB7.0 trillion, rising 13.8 percent year on year. At endQ1, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB15.8 trillion, increasing by 11.8 percent year on year. Outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew steadily, with the outstanding at the end of March increasing by RMB774.6 billion compared to the beginning of 2022. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 67.8 percent was issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In Q1 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB13.4 trillion, growing 18.2 percent year on year. At end-March, the balance of bill financing was RMB10.7 trillion, up 35.3 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.3 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 0.9 percentage points year on year. In Q1 2022, the interest rates for bill financing first increased and then decreased, remaining generally stable. 4. Stock indices went down with the amount of funds raised decreasing, while turnover expanded year on year The stock indices went down. At end-March 2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,252 points, decreasing by 10.6 percent from end-2021. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 12,118 points, decreasing by 18.4 percent from end-2021. In Q1 2022, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB58.5 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB1 trillion, representing an increase of 6.5 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets decreased year on year. In Q1, a cumulative fund of RMB333.7 billion was raised, decreasing by 1.9 percent year on year. 5. Premium income decreased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down In Q1 2022, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB1.8 trillion, down 1 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.2 percentage points from end-2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB451.3 billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 14.2 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 4.8 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went up by 21.3 percent year on year. The growth of assets in the insurance sector slowed down. At end-Q1 2022, total assets in the insurance sector increased 5.8 percent year on year to RMB25.7 trillion, a deceleration of 1 percentage point from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 2.7 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 4 percent year on year. 6. Turnover of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions witnessed rapid growth In Q1 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD1.9 trillion, a decrease of 17.7 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD5.4 trillion, an increase of 19.9 percent year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD3.4 trillion, accounting for 62.8 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD27.4 billion, rising 6.3 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD380 billion, increasing by 21.5 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 61.9 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, and prices went up At end-March 2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,942.15 per ounce, representing growth of 8.3 percent from end-2021. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB394.14 per gram, increasing by 5.4 percent from end-2021. In Q1 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 9,579.04 tons, representing growth of 2.6 percent year on year. The turnover posted RMB3.69 trillion, representing growth of 5.2 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market Institutional arrangements for bond lending were improved. In February 2022, the PBC released the Measures for the Administration of Bond Lending in the Interbank Bond Market (Announcement No.1 [2022] of the PBC). The Measures improve the institutional arrangements for bond lending in the interbank bond market by unifying the content of bond lending agreements, launching central bond lending, and improving the mechanism for default resolution. Requirements on risk prevention are also clarified in the Measures, involving such aspects as the reporting of high-value lending, information disclosures, risk monitoring, and self-regulation, aiming to protect the legitimate rights and interests of market participants, increase bond market liquidity, and enable the better functioning and sound development of the financial market. 2. Reform and institutional arrangements in the securities market The rule of law was strengthened in the capital market. In January 2022, the Supreme People’s Court released the Several Provisions of the Supreme People's Court on the Trial of Civil Cases for Damages for the Tort of Misrepresentation in the Securities Market, which raise the costs for unlawful acts in the capital market, ensure investors’ right to remedy, and provide a solid legal foundation for all market participants to perform their respective duties. In the same month, the CSRC released the Provisions on the Implementation of the Rules for the Undertakings Made by Parties to Securities and Futures Administrative Law Enforcement. The Provisions give full play to the merits of the rules for the undertakings made by the administrative law enforcement parties, provide investors with a new channel to get timely and effective remedies, and improve the quality and efficiency of administrative law enforcement. The quality of information disclosures in the capital market was improved. In January 2021, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on Improving the Quality of Information Disclosures in Prospectuses under the Registration System, which urges issuers and agencies to perform their duties by making the prospectuses more readable, investment decisions more relevant, and information disclosures more targeted. The capital market was further opened up. In February 2022, the CSRC released the Provisions on the Supervision and Administration of Depository Receipts under the Stock Connect Scheme between Domestic and Overseas Stock Exchanges. The Provisions expand the channels for two-way financing, promote the global distribution of elements, and improve the competitiveness of China’s capital market and its capability to serve the real economy. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The related-party transactions of insurance institutions were regulated. In January 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Related-Party Transactions of Banking and Insurance Institutions, which introduce requirements on the number and scale of related-party transactions. Following the principle of substance over form and penetrating regulation, they improve the recognition of related parties and their transactions, focusing particularly on the risks of tunneling that directs profits to shareholders and their related parties. The Rules also require institutions to shoulder primary responsibility for managing related-party transactions and specify the punishment of institutions and their directors, supervisors, and senior executives for violations. The underwriting and claim payments of agricultural insurance were regulated. In February 2022, the CBIRC released the Rules on Underwriting and Claim Payments of Agriculture Insurance. Based on the Interim Rules on Underwriting and Claim Payments of Agriculture Insurance and the experience gained in the reform, and the development and regulatory practice of agricultural insurance in recent years, the newly-introduced Rules center more on serving agriculture, rural areas, and rural residents, and include forest insurance as an object of regulation. They also further clarify the content and requirements of insuring information and stipulate different inspection targets of the subject-matter insured according to different types of insurance. Furthermore, the Rules cover such aspects as unifying time limits for loss assessments, stressing the prohibition of swindling premium subsidies, and highlighting insurance technology. The regulatory arrangements of reserves of the non-life insurance business were improved. In March 2022, the CBIRC released the Implementation Measures of the Rules on Reserves of the Non-life Insurance Business of Insurance Companies (Nos.1– 7). Targeting new cases and problems such as the discretionary adjustments of branches’ reserves and adjusting profits through reserves in some insurance companies, the Measures make clear the principles and methodology of reserve assessments and strengthen the institutional weak links by regulating the treatment of risk margins and discounting in reserve assessments, the reserve management of insurance company branches, and the retrospective analysis of reserves. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments The global economy slowed down in the first quarter due to, among others, the resurgence of COVID-19, growing geopolitical tensions, and faster tightening of monetary policy in the major advanced economies. Overseas inflationary pressures continued to rise, and the price of energy, metals, and agricultural products surged. Volatility has increased in global financial markets, and the prospects for a global economic recovery have become increasingly complex and uncertain. 1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies Downward pressures on global growth have emerged. COVID-19 resurged sharply earlier this year, with the global daily confirmed cases approaching 4 million once in January. Though the number of confirmed cases dropped notably in March and April, the future path of COVID-19 still remains uncertain. In February, escalation of geopolitical tensions put a further drag on the global economic recovery. In March, the consumer confidence index in the US, the euro area, and Japan fell by 11.2, 10.3, and 6.3 percentage points, respectively, from December 2021. The manufacturing purchasing managers’ index (PMI) dropped from 58.8, 58.0, and 54.3 in December 2021 to 57.1, 56.5, and 54.1. In April, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank revised downward their global growth forecasts for this year, both expressing concerns about the economic slowdown. The recovery of labor supply was sluggish in the advanced economies, and inflation continued to rise. Job vacancies in the US hit 11.266 million in February, exceeding 10 million for eight consecutive months. The average hourly wage in the US increased by 5.6 percent year on year in March, while the average weekly wage in the UK went up by 5.4 percent year on year in February, both way higher than the less than 3 percent average annual growth in the three years prior to the outbreak of COVID-19. The wage-price spiral was more pronounced in the advanced economies, which persistently pushed up inflation. In March, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) was up by 8.5 percent in the US and by 7.0 percent in the UK compared with the previous year, reaching a 40-year and 30-year high, respectively. In April, the Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the euro area rose by 7.5 percent over the prior year, a new record high since the statistics became available. Inflation also continued in some emerging economies. In March, the IPCA in Brazil and the CPI in India were up by 11.3 percent and 7.0 percent year on year, respectively. Volatility increased in global financial markets. First, geopolitical conflicts have sent the price of energy, metals, and other commodities on a roller-coaster ride. In the first quarter, the price of Brent crude oil was once close to USD140 per barrel, a new record high since 2008, and it finished the quarter by jumping 36 percent. Given the sharp swings in the price of nickel, the London Metal Exchange on one occasion suspended the trading of nickel futures and changed the trading rules. Second, major stock indices declined across the board. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, the STOXX50, and the Nikkei 225 dropped 4.6 percent, 9.2 percent, and 3.4 percent, respectively, in the first quarter, reflecting heightened volatility. Third, the yield on government bonds rose sharply as the major advanced economies quickened the pace of their monetary policy tightening. In the first quarter, the yields on 10-year government bonds in the US, Germany, and the UK went up by 60 to 80 basis points (bps). The yield on 10-year US Treasuries rose to 2.3 percent at the end of March, and hit 3.1 percent on May 6, an all- time high since November 2018.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The major advanced economies quickened their pace of monetary policy tightening. The Federal Reserve (Fed) hiked the federal funds rate by 25 bps in March and by 50 bps in May to a target range of 0.75–1 percent, kicking off a new cycle of rate hikes since December 2018. In its March dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2022 was 1.75–2 percent, which means a total hike of 175 bps this year. Seven of the 16 members argued for bigger rate increases. In addition, the Fed finished asset purchases in March and announced during the Federal Open Market Committee meeting in May that it would begin reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities on June 1 initially by USD30 billion and USD17.5 billion per month, respectively, which would then increase to USD60 billion and USD35 billion after three months, respectively. The European Central Bank kept its key policy rates unchanged. It discontinued net purchases under the pandemic emergency purchase program at the end of March and decided to finish the asset purchase program earlier. Monthly net purchases stood at EUR40 billion, EUR30 billion, and EUR20 billion respectively in the second quarter, smaller than the original plan of EUR40 billion for each month. It may end net purchases in the third quarter. After starting to raise rates last December, the Bank of England (BOE) raised the Bank Rate in February, March, and May of this year, each by 25 bps to 1.0 percent. When it met in February, the BOE’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) voted unanimously to begin reducing the Bank’s balance sheet. The MPC announced in May that it would consider beginning the process of selling UK government bonds. The Bank of Japan maintained a loose monetary policy. Among the other central banks, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Bank of Korea all raised rates on one occasion in the first quarter, each by 25 bps, and hiked rates on one occasion in April again by 50 bps, 50 bps, and 25 bps respectively. Several emerging economies continued to raise interest rates. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the risk of capital outflows, some emerging economies continued with rate hikes. In the first quarter, the central banks of Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa increased their rates twice by a total of 250 bps, 100 bps, and 50 bps, respectively, while the central banks of India, Indonesia, and Turkey kept their benchmark rates unchanged. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention Rising geopolitical tensions are weighing down on the global economic recovery. Escalating geopolitical tensions have led to higher commodity prices, such as energy and metals. Growing trade and supply chain disruptions may further push up global inflation and derail the economic recovery, adding more uncertainties to the global economy whose recovery has already been uneven and insufficient. They have also triggered both supply and demand shocks, dampened the momentum for recovery, and prolonged the high inflation in overseas markets. Financial market volatility may also be amplified substantially. The implications of a faster monetary policy tightening in the major advanced economies are emerging. Against the backdrop of a faster monetary policy shift in the major advanced economies since 2022, volatility has increased sharply in global equity, bonds, and foreign exchange markets. Policy spillovers have been felt, as cross-border capital flows are becoming more unstable. However, the tightening of monetary policy in the advanced economies has just started. How it will evolve down the road and the implications thereof merit close attention. The global recovery remains highly diverse, with the developing countries facing challenges. On the one hand, supply strains in raw materials and basic agricultural products may deal a systematic blow to global food and energy security. In particular, import-dependent developing countries face bigger pressures. On the other hand, limited capacity for COVID-19 prevention, coupled with the slower economic recovery, huge debt overhang, and tighter global liquidity will put the debt-servicing capacity of the developing countries to a test. Nor should cross-border capital flows, financial market adjustments, and other financial security issues be neglected. According to the IMF, half of the low-income countries are in or at a high risk of debt distress. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In Q1 2022, faced with multiple tests brought about by the increasingly complex and severe international environment and the frequent occurrences of COVID-19 domestically, China’s economy continued to recover steadily, and the quality of development continued to improve. The national economy got off to a generally steady start. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in Q1 2022 grew by 4.8 percent year on year to RMB27.0178 trillion on a comparable basis, up 0.8 percentage points from Q4 2021. 1. Consumption and investments were stable, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth The increase in residents’ income kept pace with economic growth, and consumption maintained growth. In Q1, China’s per capita disposable income reached RMB10345, increasing by 6.3 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 5.1 percent in real terms. The structure of income distribution continuously improved, and the per capita income gap between urban and rural residents narrowed. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q1, 23.7 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” down 1 percentage point from Q4 2021 and up 1.4 percentage points year on year, respectively. In Q1, total retail sales of consumer goods grew by 3.3 percent year on year. Investments grew steadily with an improved structure. In Q1, total fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households) increased by 9.3 percent year on year. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 15.6 percent, 6.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure and real estate development increased by 8.5 percent and 0.7 percent year on year, respectively, both lower than the growth of total investments. In terms of industries, investments in the high-tech industry grew by 27.0 percent year on year, 17.7 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in health and education grew by 23.8 percent and 17.2 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports recorded rapid growth. In Q1, imports and exports of goods grew by 10.7 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 13.4 percent year on year and imports grew by 7.5 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods posting RMB1.0369 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share of imports and exports under general trade increasing by 1.8 percentage points year on year. Exports of machinery and electronics and high-tech products increased by 9.8 percent and 10.6 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 58.4 percent and 29.2 percent of total exports, respectively. Our trading partners are becoming more diversified. Imports and exports to the countries along the Belt and Road and the RCEP (Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership) trading partners grew by 16.7 percent and 6.9 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In Q1, actually utilized FDI increased by 25.6 percent year on year to RMB379.87 billion (equivalent to USD59.09 billion), growing by 31.7 percent year on year (excluding investments in banking, securities, and the insurance industry). In terms of sectors, FDI in the high-tech industry and the services industry grew rapidly. In Q1 2021, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 52.9 percent year on year. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 57.8 percent year on year and actually utilized FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 35.7 percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the services industry grew by 17.1 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production made stable progress, industrial production grew rapidly, and the service industry continued to recover In Q1, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in the national economy grew by 6.0 percent, 5.8 percent, and 4.0 percent year on year, respectively, accounting for 4.1 percent, 39.3 percent, and 56.6 percent of GDP, respectively. Agricultural production was stable, and animal husbandry grew steadily. Preparations for spring ploughing were carried out smoothly and orderly, the intended sowing area of wheat and rice was generally stable, and the intended sowing area of soybeans increased significantly. Annual grain output has been over 650 million tons for seven successive years, with sufficient total grain supply and abundant inventory. Hogs available for slaughter continued to grow and the production of beef and lamb grew steadily. In Q1, the value-added of agriculture increased by 4.8 percent year on year and hogs available for slaughter increased by 14.1 percent year on year. The output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 8.8 percent year on year. Industrial production grew rapidly, and the high-tech manufacturing sector continued to play a leading role. In Q1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 6.5 percent year on year. Specifically, the valueadded of the mining sector increased by 10.7 percent year on year. The manufacturing sector increased by 6.2 percent year on year. The electricity, heat, gas and water production, and supply sectors increased by 6.1 percent year on year. The industrial structure was continuously optimized. The value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector increased by 14.2 percent and 8.1 percent year on year, which were 7.7 percentage points and 1.6 percentage points higher, respectively, than that of the IEDS. New energy cars, solar cells, and industrial robots grew by 140.8 percent, 24.3 percent, and 10.2 percent year on year, respectively. The profits of industrial enterprises increased steadily. In Q1, total profits of the IEDS increased by 8.5 percent year on year. Growth in the service industry continued to recover. In Q1, the value-added of the service industry grew by 4.0 percent year on year. The Index of Service Production (ISP) increased by 2.5 percent year on year. Affected notably by the recent COVID-19 outbreaks, shopping malls, restaurants, and entertainment places in some areas closed down. (The recent COVID-19 outbreaks had a major impact on contact-based consumption, with shopping malls, restaurants, and entertainment venues closed in some areas.) In March, the retail sales of goods decreased by 2.1 percent year on year, and catering revenue decreased by 16.4 percent year on year. At the same time, due to poor logistics transportation and passenger transport running at a low level, the volume of business freight decreased by 1.9 percent and passenger flows decreased by 43.5 percent year on year in March. The growth of a modern service industry attained a good momentum, and telecommunications, radio and television and satellite transmission services, monetary and financial services and the insurance industry were still within a prosperous range. In Q1, the value-added of electronic information transmission/software/information technology services and the financial industry grew by 10.8 percent and 5.1 percent year on year, respectively. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and the increase in producer prices receded from the previous high level Consumer prices increased moderately. In Q1, the CPI increased by 1.1 percent year on year. Specifically, the CPI in January and February increased by 0.9 percent year on year and rose by 1.5 percent year on year in March. The increase in international energy prices accelerated the rise in domestic fuel prices, and non-food prices increased by 2.1 percent year on year. Driven by declines in the price of pork, food prices decreased by 3.1 percent year on year. The year-on-year increase of producer prices receded from the previous high level. In Q1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 8.7 percent. Specifically, the growth rate of the PPI in January, February, and March registered 9.1 percent, 8.8 percent, and 8.3 percent, respectively, representing a downward trend. Policies aiming to ensure stable supplies and prices continued taking effect. The price increases in the coal sector and the steel sector declined slightly from the previous level. The Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by a cumulative 11.3 percent year on year, accelerating by 0.3 percentage points from 2021. 4. Fiscal revenue rose steadily, and expenditures accelerated In Q1, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB6203.71 billion, increasing by 8.6 percent year on year. Specifically, tax revenue amounted to RMB5245.16 billion, up 7.7 percent year on year. Non-tax revenue registered RMB958.55 billion, up 14.2 percent year on year. Among the main taxes, the domestic value-added tax increased by 3.6 percent year on year. Growth slowed down due to the continuation of tax deferrals for small and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises (SMEs). (Among the main taxes, due to the continuation of tax deferrals for manufacturing SMEs, growth of the domestic value-added tax slowed to 3.6 percent year on year.) The domestic consumption tax, business income tax, and personal income tax went up by 15.8 percent, 9.8 percent, and 16.5 percent year on year, respectively. In Q1, expenditures in the national general budget posted RMB6358.68 billion, increasing by 8.3 percent and an acceleration of 2.1 percentage points from the same period of the previous year. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures related to disaster prevention and control, and emergency management, science and technology, and transportation grew quickly, registering year-on-year growth of 35.4 percent, 22.4 percent, and 10.9 percent, respectively. People’s livelihood and other key areas were supported effectively. Expenditures on education, agriculture/forestry/water resource projects, social security and employment, and public health increased by 8.5 percent, 8.4 percent, 6.8 percent, and 6.2 percent, respectively. 5. The employment situation remained generally stable New employment in the urban areas expanded and the surveyed unemployment rate increased slightly. In Q1, 2.85 million people were newly employed, and the surveyed unemployment rate averaged 5.5 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year. Specifically, the average surveyed unemployment rate among the main labor group between the ages of 25 and 59 was 4.9 percent, and the average unemployment rate among the population with local household registrations was 5.5 percent, both unchanged from 2021. Under the impact of COVID-19, several labor groups faced increasing employment pressures. In March, the unemployment rate among the migrant population with agricultural household registrations increased to 5.9 percent, higher than the urban unemployment rate for two consecutive months. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments in China. According to preliminary statistics, in Q1 2022, China’s current account surplus registered USD89.5 billion, accounting for 2.1 percent of GDP, continuously staying within a reasonable range. Specifically, according to the balance of payments statistics, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD145 billion, an increase of 18 percent year on year, whereas trade in services recorded a deficit of USD18.2 billion, down 30 percent year on year. A basic equilibrium was maintained in cross-border capital flows. Specifically, direct investments recorded a surplus of USD65 billion. At end-Q1 2022, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.188 trillion, down USD62.2 billion from that at end-Q2021, mainly due to the depreciation of non-US currency against the US dollar, and the decline in global asset prices. The risks of foreign debt were generally controllable. By the end of 2021, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.7466 trillion, and medium- and longterm foreign debt accounted for 47 percent of all foreign debt. The Debt to GDP Ratio (the ratio of the total outstanding foreign debt to current GDP) was 15.5 percent. The Debt to Export Ratio (the ratio of total outstanding foreign debt to exports for the current year) was 77.3 percent. The Debt Service Ratio (the ratio of foreign debt service, including principal and interest payments due, to exports for the current year) was 5.9 percent. The ratio of short-term debt to foreign exchange reserves was 44.5 percent. All of the ratios were under the internationally recognized safe level. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In March 2022, among 70 medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built residential housing prices increased by 0.7 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.3 percentage points from end-2021. Second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 0.9 percent year on year, decelerating by 1.9 percentage points from end-2021. In Q1 2022, total floor area of sold units decreased by 13.8 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 22.7 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development grew by 0.7 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development rose by 0.7 percent year on year, accounting for 74.8 percent of total investments in real estate development. At end-March 2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 6 percent year on year to RMB53.2 trillion, a deceleration of 1.9 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 8.9 percent year on year to RMB38.8 trillion, a deceleration of 2.4 percentage points from end-2021. Outstanding housing development loans dropped by 1.3 percent year on year to RMB9.5 trillion, a deceleration of 1.8 percentage points from end-2021. 7.2 The construction industry transforming toward the “30·60 goals” Construction, covering housing construction, civil construction, installation, decoration, and others, is a pillar industry in the economy. In 2021, the construction industry contributed 7 percent to China’s national GDP and employed more than 50 million people. In recent years, the industry rose up to the challenges brought about by the pandemic and other factors and ran smoothly. In Q1 2022, the industry remained an economic pillar as gross output rose by 9.2 percent year on year and the floor area of projects under construction grew by 3 percent year on year. In the meantime, whole-life carbon emissions in the construction industry, counted in building material production, building construction, and building operations, accounted for 50.6 percent of the total carbon emissions in China, 1 which made the industry a key segment for achieving the “30·60 goals” and posed a number of challenges to its transition. First, the production of building materials emits much carbon. Whole-life carbon emissions in the construction industry amounted to 5 billion tons in China, with the production of building materials including cement and steel taking up 55 percent. Second, the large number of existing buildings and those under construction places great pressures on carbon emissions control. China has the largest number of existing buildings and newly built buildings within a year, with the urban building stock standing at 65 billion square meters and newly-started construction in 2021 registering 2 billion square meters. Third, there is still room for improvement in design philosophy and building technology, as well as in the policies, technologies, and implementation systems of green buildings. In addition, pressure is mounting in the construction industry as the development model in real estate is shifting and the costs of raw materials and labor are climbing. In 2021, the growth rate of construction enterprises’ profits posted only 1.3 percent year on year. As for the industry, the profit-output ratio2 dropped to 2.9 percent and the number of employees decreased by 1.6 percent year on year, respectively. Moving forward, following The 14th Five-year Plan for the Development of the Construction Industry and the 14th Five-year Plan for Building Energy Efficiency and Green Building Development, it is suggested that the building performance should be continuously improved, the green and low-carbon transformation of the construction industry should be greatly boosted, and the coordinated development of intelligent construction and new construction industrialization should be accelerated. To achieve these, the following efforts are needed. First, advocating a green and low-carbon design philosophy for buildings, strengthening research and development of generic and core technology, and enabling better development and energy conservation for green construction. Second, transforming more buildings into green and energy-saving buildings and promoting the large-scale development of green buildings. It also helps by making existing residential buildings more energy efficient, strictly controlling the construction of high energy-consuming public buildings, and piloting the construction of zero carbon buildings. Third, improving the mechanism of the construction market by upgrading the management system of enterprise qualifications, strengthening the research and development of core technology, building a system of standards for advanced and applicable intelligent construction, and establishing a regulatory mechanism for the new construction market. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy In Q1, GDP saw year-on-year growth of 4.8 percent, and the Chinese economy was off to an overall stable start. Agricultural production was stable, and preparations for spring ploughing and sowing proceeded in an orderly manner. Industrial production grew rapidly, the momentum for innovation development continued, and industrial upgrading was a prominent driving force. Growth of the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector and the equipment manufacturing sector were significantly higher than that of all Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size (IEDS). The people's livelihood and residential income continued to improve. Investments in the manufacturing sector maintained rapid growth, and investments in infrastructure rebounded strongly. Green transformation proceeded steadily, with energy consumption per GDP continuing to decline. Foreign investment and foreign trade continued to achieve double-digit growth, an equilibrium was maintained in the balance of payments, and foreign exchange reserves remained stable at over USD3.1 trillion. Macro policies were proactive, a sound monetary policy was implemented to intensify intertemporal adjustments, and the financial aggregate increased stably, providing stronger support for the real economy. The quality and efficiency of the proactive fiscal policy were enhanced, and effective investments were significantly accelerated. Overall, consumer prices are stable. In Q1 2022, due to the continuous decline of domestic pork prices, the CPI growth remained at a relatively low level, with a cumulative year-on-year increase of 1.1 percent. Specifically, the year-on-year increase in March registered 1.5 percent. In the future, the CPI may increase moderately compared with last year, but it will continue to move within a reasonable range. At the same time, year-on-year growth of the PPI in each month of Q1 moderated. Specifically, the PPI grew by 8.3 percent year on year in March, narrowing 5.2 percentage points from last year’s highest point. In the future, the overall downward trend of the PPI may continue, but it also needs to guard against the pressures of imported inflation brought about by the rise in global commodity prices. Overall, China’s economic performance remains within a reasonable range. The supply of industrial and agricultural products and services is generally adequate, the demand for consumption and investment is still in the recovery zone, and monetary policy remains sound, all of which are conducive to keeping prices stable for the medium and long term. Recently, COVID-19 and the crisis in Ukraine have led to an increase in risks and challenges, and the development environment of the Chinese economy is becoming more complex and severe, with increasing uncertainties. From an external perspective, first, the international geopolitical tensions have not only disrupted global food and energy supplies, resulting in large fluctuations in commodity prices, but also have disrupted supply chains and international trade, hindering the process of globalization. Second, inflation in the major developed economies has hit a decade high, and the developed countries are accelerating and stepping up efforts to tighten monetary policy, which may bring about new disruptions and spillover effects. Third, the global pandemic is still spreading, bringing disruptions and challenges to the world economic recovery. In April, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund lowered the global economic growth forecasts for 2022 by 0.9 and 0.8 percentage points to 3.2 and 3.6 percent, respectively. From a domestic perspective, the Chinese economy is still faced with triple pressures from shrinking demand, supply shocks, and weakening expectations. An outstanding manifestation is that the recent outbreak of the pandemic has appeared in many places, with broad coverage and frequent occurrences, and it has a greater impact on economic performance. First, contact-based consumption in sectors such as catering, retail, and tourism is weakening, and investment in some sectors has not bottomed out. Second, some enterprises have halted or reduced production, and difficulties faced by market entities have obviously increased. Third, frictions appear in freight logistics and operations of the industrial chain and supply chain, which have constrained the smooth flow of economic circulation. However, it should be noted that there are many strategic advantages to China’s development at present. The Chinese economy is enormous in size with large room for policy maneuvering and it is highly resilient and vigorous. It also has a superlarge market, and the fundamentals for long-term steady growth remain unchanged. We have the capability and the conditions to overcome the difficulties and challenges and to achieve sustainable and healthy economic development. In response to the difficulties, we should remain confident, take proactive and decisive actions to cope with the changes and to overcome the difficulties, coordinate pandemic containment and socio-economic development, deepen reform and opening-up, ensure the people’s basic livelihood, and strive to stabilize the macro economy. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, continuing to follow the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will implement the guidelines made at the 19th CPC National Congress, the plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, and the Central Economic Work Conference, as well as the requirements set out in the Report on the Work of the Government. In line with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will adhere to the principle of giving top priority to stability while pursuing progress, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully, and comprehensively, and accelerate the building of a new development paradigm. It will deepen the supply-side structural reform and support the efforts to stabilize growth, employment, and prices. Furthermore, it will build a modern central banking system, improve the modern monetary policy framework, and promote high-quality development. Striving to maintain macroeconomic stability, the PBC will keep the economic indicators within a reasonable range and do its part to set the stage for the upcoming 20th CPC National Congress. In pursuing a sound monetary policy, the PBC will step up support for the real economy, give top priority to stability, and act proactively to boost confidence. It will conduct intertemporal adjustments, resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies, and give play to the monetary policy tools in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure. It will effectively implement the financial policy measures aimed at stabilizing enterprises and securing employment, with a focus on giving support to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and COVID-stricken industries and groups. Through the proper use of monetary policy tools of different types, the PBC will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and make the growth of credit aggregates more stable, so that the growth rates of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will continue to be basically in line with nominal economic growth and the macro leverage ratio will remain basically stable. By actively using structural monetary policy tools to provide additional support, the PBC will guide financial institutions to issue loans reasonably so as to channel more financial resources to key fields and weak links as well as to those enterprises and industries hit hard by COVID-19. It will increase, when appropriate, the quotas of central bank lending for the agricultural and rural sector and MSBs, while making good use of the inclusive MSB lending facility, the central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, and the special central bank lending for inclusive elderly care services. Concrete work will be done to put into use the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal. In addition, the PBC will enhance the marketoriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by optimizing the central bank policy rate system, strengthening the regulation of deposit rates, and bringing into play the important role of the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments. It will put more efforts into stabilizing bank liability costs, further tap into the loan prime rate (LPR) reform and bring down the overall financing costs for enterprises. Keeping a close watch on price movements, it will provide support for sufficient production and supply of food and energy and keep prices generally stable. Committed to a managed floating exchange- rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, the PBC will strengthen macro-prudential management of cross-border capital flows, enhance expectation management, and guide market entities to be risk-neutral, thereby maintaining the normal operation of the foreign exchange market and keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. While paying close attention to monetary policy shifts in the major advanced economies, the PBC will focus on domestic conditions and properly balance internal and external equilibria. In the meantime, it will uphold bottom-line thinking, improve the holistic approach, and make coordinated efforts to forestall and defuse major financial risks based on market principles and the rule of law. With these efforts, it will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risk will occur. First, the PBC will maintain stable growth in money, credit, and the AFRE. It will closely follow the development of a number of uncertainties at home and abroad to make in-depth analysis of liquidity supply and demand. While a mix of monetary policy tools will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, it will further improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of its operations to better stabilize market expectations. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, continue to ease liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on bank credit supply, cultivate and stimulate credit demand from the real economy, guide financial institutions to issue loans in a reasonable manner, and make the growth of credit aggregates more stable. In this way, the growth rates of money supply and the AFRE are expected to remain basically in line with nominal economic growth. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment by replenishing capital for commercial banks through multiple channels and stepping up support for small and medium-sized banks in their issuance of perpetual bonds and other capital replenishment instruments, thereby improving the capacity of banks to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will continue to bring into play the guiding role of structural monetary policy tools. It will make effective use of the policies on central bank lending and discounts for the agricultural and rural sector and MSBs, increase the quotas of such lending when appropriate, and give play to the inclusive MSB lending facility. At the same time, it will ramp up support for agro-related entities, for the service industries requiring direct contacts, such as the hotel and catering industry, wholesale, retail, and tourism, which have been severely affected by COVID-19, and for other industries that have prospects but have met with temporary difficulties due to the impact of COVID- 19. The PBC will continue to put into operation the special central bank lending for clean and efficient use of coal, meet the reasonable demands regarding production and construction for coal security, coal purchases by power companies, coal reserves, and other fields of the like, and will help ensure the stable supply of energy, such as electricity and coal. With the practical application of the CERF, the PBC will increase support for major wind and photovoltaic power bases and the upgrading of the supporting coal-fired power plants. The aim is to promote the transition to a green and low-carbon economy while ensuring a secure energy supply. In addition, the PBC will pick up pace in moving ahead with the implementation of the two lending facilities, i.e., the special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and that for inclusive elderly care services, which will provide support for the issuance of loans that meet the criteria. These measures will guide financial institutions to intensify financial support for enterprises in their technological development and transformation and for institutions offering inclusive elderly care services. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. More work will be done to implement the financial relief policies already introduced. The PBC will urge and guide financial institutions to act in a proactive and targeted manner and issue loans reasonably. It will require financial institutions to make every effort to support MSBs in difficulty and provide differentiated financial services for COVID-stricken sectors. It will step up financial support for core enterprises in the industrial and supply chains and support the healthy development of private businesses. All-out efforts will be made to provide financial safeguards for food security as well as the production and sales of major agricultural products. Moreover, the PBC will provide financial services to support the supply of coal and other energies while stepping up financial support for the smooth operation of logistics and transport as well as for effective investment. It will push for the implementation of the circular on providing financial support for the priority work in rural revitalization, guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, take targeted measures early on, and effectively ramp up financial support for the agricultural sector, rural areas, and farmers, thereby moving further ahead with rural revitalization. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance and support fine-tuning of real estate policies based on local realities to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions. Meanwhile, it will increase financial support for the rental of housing, protect the legitimate rights and interests of consumers in the market, and promote the healthy development of the real estate market to foster a virtuous circle. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms to smooth the channels of monetary policy transmission. It will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by optimizing the central bank policy rate system and guiding market rates to move around the policy rates. The PBC will strengthen the regulation of deposit rates and bring into play the important role of the mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments. It will put more efforts into stabilizing bank liability costs, further tap into the LPR reform, and bring down the overall financing costs for enterprises. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, and give play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. Furthermore, it will strengthen expectation management and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market. Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will improve the services of exchange rate risk management for enterprises, offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept, on reducing the costs of risk hedging for enterprises, and on strengthening risk management of their foreign exchange businesses, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. The PBC will continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by further expanding the use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepening international monetary cooperation, and developing offshore RMB markets. In addition, it will conduct pilot projects for the high-quality opening-up of cross-border trade and investment, further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account. Fifth, the PBC will make continued efforts to deepen financial reform, and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. Focusing on strengthening corporate governance, it will deepen the reform of large commercial banks and establish a modern financial enterprise system with Chinese characteristics. The reform of development financial institutions and policy financial institutions will continue, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities. By doing so, they will better play their roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBC will optimize the administrative framework for the issuance of financial bonds and steadily promote a higher-quality opening-up of the bond market. It will also enhance the efficiency and interconnectivity of the multi-tiered market system, cultivate diversified and qualified investors, and boost innovation in the bond market to intensify its support for key fields and weak links. More work will be done to improve the legal system for the bond market, to tighten requirements for information disclosures, and to strengthen regulation over intermediary institutions. Meanwhile, the PBC will reinforce monitoring and resolution of bond market risks and act in a timely way to forestall and defuse the risks. It will step up efforts on unified law enforcement in the bond market, and crack down on illegal and irregular conduct. Sixth, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential management system as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning and to enrich the macro-prudential policy tools in the toolkit. The PBC will improve the regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will push systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. At the same time, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve their total loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention abilities. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate financial holding companies. Work will move on stably to implement the requirement that non-financial enterprises which fall under the prescribed circumstances should apply for the establishment of financial holding companies according to the law. And the PBC will continue to improve the relevant rules and regulations to promote the well-regulated and sustainable development of financial holding companies. Furthermore, it will strengthen the financial legal system. With the drafting of the Law on Financial Stability and the establishment of the Financial Stability Fund, it will institutionalize and further improve the long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution, aiming to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is market-oriented and law-based. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” the PBC will prevent and defuse financial risks by focusing on its top priorities. It will adopt differentiated approaches in the process, reduce existing risks， and strictly guard against emerging risks. It will keep a close watch on risks in key fields and enhance the foresightedness, timeliness, and effectiveness of risk identification, while enriching and improving early corrective measures. It will leverage regulatory resources and risk resolution resources in a coordinated manner by strengthening both horizontal and vertical coordination. The PBC will work to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement the corresponding measures. It will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards, thereby defending the bottom line whereby no systemic risk will occur. Part 1. Money and Credit Analysis Since the beginning of 2022, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) has followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and has implemented the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, and the Central Economic Work Conference, and the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. The PBC has put stable growth in a more prominent position and strengthened implementation of the sound monetary policy. It has also given full play to monetary policy instruments for both aggregate and structural adjustments. Money, credit, and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) have witnessed reasonable growth, the credit structure has been improved continuously, and overall financing costs have steadily declined, providing robust support for stabilizing the macro economy. I. Liquidity in the banking system was adequate at a reasonable level Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has given top priority to the stability of monetary policy, made progress while maintaining stability, and taken prompt measures at an early stage based on changes in the macro situation. It has adopted a mix of instruments, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, turning over profits to the central treasury, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending and discounts, and open market operations (OMOs), to inject liquidity into the market. It has also managed the intensity and pace of OMOs in a flexible manner, kept liquidity in the banking system adequate at a reasonable level, and brought down money market interest rates, creating a favorable liquidity environment for stabilizing the macro economy and keeping the economic indicators within a reasonable range. At end-June 2022, the excess reserve ratio of financial institutions registered 1.5 percent, up 0.1 percentage points year on year.II. Lending by financial institutions grew rapidly, and lending rates remained at low levels Credit support for the real economy was strengthened. Since the beginning of Q2, due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the downward pressures on the economy, enterprises, especially micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), have been faced with increasing operational difficulties, For a period of time, their demands for credit have been waning and the growth of loans has slowed down. In response, the PBC successively held a number of symposia on the monetary and credit situations, inviting participation by major financial institutions, the PBC branches at various levels, and its affiliated institutions, as well as the heads of the policy banks, respectively. Financial institutions were encouraged to increase lending based on prudent operations and in line with market-based principles. With the accelerated implementation of a package of policies and measures to stabilize the economy, positive results have been achieved to contain COVID-19, market expectations have been improving, and marginal demand for credit has been picking up since late May. RMB-denominated loans witnessed a substantial year-on-year increase in both May and June. At end-June, outstanding loans issued by financial institutions in domestic and foreign currencies grew 10.8 percent year on year to RMB212.3 trillion, an increase of RMB13.8 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB629.2 billion. Outstanding RMB-denominated loansgrew 11.2 percent year on year to RMB206.4 trillion, up RMB13.7 trillion from the beginning of 2022, or a year-on-year acceleration of RMB919.2 billion. Box 1 Implementation of Financial Policies to Facilitate an Economic Recovery Since the beginning of 2022, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC has, implemented the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council by attaching more importance to stabilizing growth. It has enhanced implementation of sound monetary policies, given better play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy tools, strengthened the guiding role of credit policies, and provided relief for market entities so as to prop up the macro economy. First, credit support for the real economy has been increased. The PBC has adopted a mix of tools, such as the RRR cut, the MLF, central bank lending and discounts, and OMOs, to inject more liquidity into the economy and to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The PBC has also accelerated the pace of turning over surplus profits to the central budget, which reached RMB1 trillion as of end-July, with the effects equivalent to a sweeping RRR cut of 0.5 percentage points. It has held a series of meetings, attended by heads of policy banks, major financial institutions, and the PBC branches and affiliated institutions, to analyze the monetary and credit situations, and to encourage financial institutions to issue more loans in accordance with market-based principles as long as they abide by operational prudence. Second, financial institutions have been encouraged to allow market entities affected by COVID-19 to defer repayments of principal and interest. On April 18, the PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) jointly released Notice on Strengthening Financial Services for COVID-19 Containment and Socio-Economic Development, supporting the affected populations by encouraging flexible adjustments to repayment plans for their mortgage and other personal loans, such as appropriately deferring the repayment deadlines, extending the loan terms, and postponing repayment of the principal. As a measure in the policy package of the State Council to stabilize the economy, financial institutions have also been encouraged to allow deferred repayment of principal and interest on loans to MSMEs, self-employed businesses, and truck drivers, as well as on mortgage loans, consumer loans, and other loans to individuals affected by COVID-19. Financial bonds for freight and logistics have been rolled out to support bond issuances by three types of non-bank financial institutions, including auto group finance companies, auto financial companies, and financial leasing companies. The money raised will be used exclusively to support deferred repayments of loans by truck owners and logistics firms and to provide them with additional funds.Third, structural monetary policy instruments have provided targeted liquidity support. The PBC has continued to make good use of central bank lending and discounts to support inclusive finance. At end-June, central bank lending to support rural development and micro and small businesses (MSBs) registered RMB540.4 billion and RMB1.3997 trillion, respectively, while central bank discounts posted RMB614.5 billion, with the three totaling RMB2.5546 trillion. The PBC has enhanced the support plan for inclusive MSB loans. It has strengthened positive incentives, increasing the share of funding support for the plan from 1 percent to 2 percent. It has also launched the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal, and it has increased the quota of the latter by RMB100 billion to support coal development and use and to boost the coal reserve capacity. In addition, it has established special central bank lending facilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and transportation and logistics so as to mobilize more support from financial institutions. Fourth, enterprise financing costs have been reduced. The one-year and five-year loan prime rates (LPR) have fallen by 0.1 percentage points and 0.2 percentage points respectively, since the beginning of this year. The monetary policy transmission mechanism featuring “market rates+central bank guidance→LPR→lending rates” has been increasingly facilitated. As a result, lending rates for businesses have hit a record low. Under the guidance of the PBC, the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rates has improved the formation of the self-regulated ceiling of deposit rates, established a market-based adjustment mechanism of deposit rates, and encouraged deposit rates to float with the market rates. The PBC has also guided the self-regulatory mechanism to release the Initiatives on Reinforcing Self-Regulatory Management for Agreement Deposits, in a bid to regulate the pricing of interest rates on agreement deposits and other deposit products, to urge the orderly reduction of malpractices, and to uphold benign competition in the deposit market. Fifth, diversified financing channels have been expanded. Financial institutions are encouraged to issue special financial bonds for agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, and for MSBs, so as to expand their available sources of funds for lending. Since the beginning of this year, twenty commercial banks have issued a total of RMB215.5 billion special financial bonds for MSBs, while four commercial banks have issued a total of RMB8.4 billion of special financial bonds for agriculture, rural areas, and farmers. The raised funds are used to grant MSB and agro-related loans. The Unified Registration of Security Interests Over Movable Properties and Rights, Receivable Financing Service Platform of the Credit Reference Center (CRC), and the Supply Chain Commercial Paper Platform have been brought into full play to enhance the circulation efficiency of enterprise receivables. Due to these platforms, 365,000entries of receivable financing had been processed by end-June 2022, totaling RMB16.7 trillion. Specifically, the number and value of MSB financing reached 295,000 deals and RMB13 trillion, respectively. Sixth, financial institutions have been encouraged to enhance support for the development of infrastructure and major projects. The PBC has worked along with the relevant departments to enhance the connections between banks and enterprises. A list of major projects was developed for key sectors, such as transportation, energy, and water conservancy, with reference to which financial institutions could match the supply of medium- and long-term loans with effective demand. The credit line for development and policy banks has been raised by RMB800 billion, and RMB300 billion worth of policy and development financial instruments have been launched so as to support the issuance of medium- and long-term infrastructure loans. Development and policy banks have also been guided to accelerate project reserves, to break down tasks, to enhance assessment and incentives, and to streamline procedures for the granting of loans, in an effort to enhance the capability of lending to infrastructure. In the meantime, syndicated loans and a PPP model have been leveraged to mobilize funding from commercial banks and social capital. Overall, since the beginning of 2022 monetary policy has been more forward-looking, precise, and independent backed by proactive measures, and the financial sector has been improving the quality and efficiency of its services for the real economy. Money and credit have grown at a reasonable pace. At end-June, broad money M2, outstanding AFRE, and outstanding RMB loans grew by 11.4 percent, 10.8 percent, and 11.2 percent year on year, respectively, all remaining at a high level of above 10 percent, thus indicating stronger financial support for the real economy. Financing costs for businesses have declined remarkably. In June, the weighted average rate on corporate loans registered 4.16 percent, hitting a record low. The credit structure has continued to improve. At end-June, outstanding inclusive MSB loans reached RMB22 trillion, up 23.8 percent year on year, maintaining growth of over 20 percent for thirty-eight consecutive months. The credit supply of financial institutions for sectors affected by COVID-19 has increased steadily. At end-June, outstanding loans to the accommodations and catering sector, wholesale and retail sector, transportation, warehousing, and postal sector, culture, and sports and entertainment sector totaled RMB30.69 trillion, representing an increase of RMB1.81 trillion from the beginning of the year, RMB173 billion more than the increase during the same period in 2021. A national directory containing a total of 685,000 enterprises in sectors affected by COVID-19 and key enterprises in the supply chain has been established. RMB10.2 trillion in loans has been issued to these enterprises, helping 39.5 million people retain and find jobs.The credit structure improved continuously. At end-June, medium and long-term loans to enterprises and public entities grew by RMB6.2 trillion, compared with those at the beginning of the year, accounting for 54.6 percent of total corporate loans. The year-on-year (YOY) growth of medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector registered 29.7 percent, 18.5 percentage points higher than that of total loans. Outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs grew by 23.8 percent year on year, 12.6 percentage points higher than that of total loans, to support 52.39 million MSBs, a rise of 36.8 percent year on year.The weighted average interest rate of loans was at a statistically low level. The PBC has continuously deepened the market-oriented reform of interest rates and has given play to the role of the LPR reform, thereby enhancing competition in the credit market. In the meantime, the PBC has improved regulation of deposit interest rates and it has set up a market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit interest rates so as to maintain benign competitive order in the market, to stabilize costs of bank liabilities, and to continuously bring down lending rates. In June, the one-year LPR and the over-five-year LPR stood at 3.70 percent and 4.45 percent, respectively, down 0.10 percentage points and 0.20 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. In June, the weighted average lending rate recorded 4.41 percent, down 0.52 percentage point year on year. In particular, the weighted average interest rate on ordinary loans registered 4.76 percent, down 0.44 percentage points year on year, while that on corporate lending fell by 0.42 percentage points year on year to 4.16 percent. On the whole, the interest rates on RMB-denominated loans witnessed a further decline from those in March, manifesting robust financial support for the real economy.In June, the share of ordinary loans with rates above, at, or below the LPR registered 62.39 percent, 7.82 percent, and 29.80 percent, respectively.Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits and loans edged up. In June, the weighted average interest rates on demand large-value USD-denominated deposits and on large-value USD-denominated deposits with maturities within three months registered 0.28 percent and 1.49 percent, respectively, up 0.18 percentage points and 1.19 percentage points from December 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rates on USD-denominated loans with maturities within three months and with maturities between three months (including three months) and six months registered 2.34 percent and 2.58 percent, up 1.23 and 1.46 percentage points from December 2021, respectively.The growth of deposits picked up steadily. At end-June, outstanding deposits in domestic and foreign currencies of all financial institutions increased 10.5 percent year on year to RMB257.7 trillion, up RMB19.1 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB4.3 trillion year on year. Outstanding RMB deposits grew 10.8 percent year on year to RMB251.1 trillion, an increase of RMB18.8 trillion from the beginning of 2022 and an acceleration of RMB4.8 trillion year on year. Outstanding deposits in foreign currencies stood at USD986.7 billion, a decrease of USD10.3 billion from the beginning of 2022 and a deceleration of USD140 billion.III. Money supply and the AFRE grew at a reasonable pace Money and credit aggregates maintained reasonable growth, providing robust support for the real economy. At end-June, outstanding broad money M2, narrow money M1, and currency in circulation M0 registered RMB258.1 trillion, RMB67.4 trillion, and RMB9.6 trillion, respectively, up 11.4 percent, 5.8 percent, and 13.8 percent year on year, respectively. The first half of 2022 witnessed a net cash injection of RMB518.6 billion, RMB515.4 billion more than that in the same period of 2021. According to preliminary statistics, the outstanding AFRE reached RMB334.27 trillion at end-June. Its year-on-year growth registered 10.8 percent, up 0.5 percentage points compared with that at end-2021. In the first half of 2022, the AFRE increment totaled RMB21 trillion, RMB3.2 trillion more than that in the same period of 2021. The structure of the AFRE featured the following: first, the increment of RMB loans grew significantly year on year. In the first half of 2022, the increment of RMB loans issued by financial institutions to the real economy grew by RMB632.9 billion year on year to RMB13.58 trillion, accounting for 64.6 percent of the AFRE increment during the same period. Second, the increment of government bonds and corporate bonds increased year on year, and they were RMB2.2 trillion and RMB391.3 billion more than those in the corresponding period of the previous year, respectively. Third, off-balance-sheet financing decreased at a slower pace. Specifically, in the first half of 2022 the decreases in entrusted and trust loans were RMB109.1 billion and RMB348.7 billion less than those in the first half of 2021 respectively, while the decrease in undiscounted bankers’ acceptances was RMB171.4 billion more than that in the same period of 2021. Fourth, asset-backed securities of depository institutions decreased by a larger margin year on year, while loans written off grew more than in the previous year.IV. The RMB exchange rate remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level Since the beginning of 2022, cross-border capital flows and foreign exchange supply and demand have been basically in equilibrium, and market expectations have been generally stable. The market has played a decisive role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate, and the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In the first half of the year, based on market supply and demand, the RMB exchange rate witnessed both an appreciation and a depreciation against a basket of currencies. At end-June, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB exchange rate index and the RMB exchange rate index based on the special drawing rights (SDRs) basket closed at 102.01 and 100.61, respectively, down 0.5 percent and up 0.3 percent from end-2021, respectively. According to calculations by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), from end of 2021 to end-June 2022, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) of the RMB remained flat, while the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the RMB depreciated 4.0 percent. From 2005, when the reform of RMB exchange rate formation regime began, to end-June 2022, the NEER and the REER of the RMB appreciated 48.7 percent and 51.8 percent, respectively. In the first half of this year, the RMB exchange rate against the US dollar depreciated slightly. At end-June, the central parity of the RMB against the US dollar was 6.7114, depreciating 5.0 percent from end-2021 and appreciating 23.3 percent on a cumulative basis since the beginning of the reform of the exchange rate formation regime in 2005. In the first half of 2022, the annualized volatility rate of the RMB against the US dollar was 5.2 percent. In the first half of 2022, cross-border RMB settlements increased 16 percent year on year to RMB20.3 trillion, with RMB receipts and payments posting RMB10.0 trillion and RMB10.3 trillion, respectively. Cross-border RMB settlements under the current account grew by 27 percent year on year to RMB4.6 trillion. Specifically, RMB settlements of trade in goods registered RMB3.5 trillion, while RMB settlements of trade in services and under other items registered RMB1.1 trillion. Cross-border RMB settlements under the capital account registered RMB15.7 trillion, increasing 13 percent year on year. Box 2 The Weight of the Renminbi Raised in the SDR Currency Basket On May 11, 2022, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) completed its quinquennial review of the SDR valuation, and it decided to raise the weight of the RMB in the SDR currency basket from 10.92 percent to 12.28 percent, still ranking third. The Executive Board decided that the new SDR currency basket would come into effect on August 1, 2022. The SDR, created as a supplementary reserve asset by the IMF in 1969, composes international reserves along with other reserves such as gold and foreign currencies. It also serves as the unit of account for the IMF and other international organizations. At present, the SDR has been mainly used for transactions between IMF members with the IMF or other international financial organizations, which can be used to exchange for freely usable currencies, to repay loans of the IMF, to pay interest, and to pay for the share incurred by the increase in capital. Effective on October 1, 2016, the RMB joined the US dollar, euro, Japanese yen, and British pound sterling in the SDR basket, with a weight of 10.92 percent. The criteria for the SDR valuation reviews by the IMF mainly fall into two categories. First, the export criterion means the exports of goods and services by some country or region must rank among the top of the world. Second, the currencies are freely usable,which means that they are widely used to make payments for international transactions and they are widely traded in the principal exchange markets. In practice, it is calculated by the proportion of the currency in official reserves, in foreign exchange transactions, and in the liabilities of the international debt securities and banking industry. The formula for determining the currency weights in the SDR basket is as follows: the currency weight = 1/2*the proportion of a country’s exports against the world+1/6*the proportion of the currency in the official reserves+1/6*the proportion of the foreign exchange transactions denominated in the currency+1/6*the proportion of the international debt securities and outstanding liabilities of international banking industries denominated in the currency. This was the first review since the RMB was included in the SDR basket in 2016. During this review period, all the indicators of the RMB witnessed rises, except for the international debt securities. Specifically, in terms of exports, the proportion of China’s exports increased from 10.5 percent during the previous review period to 12 percent during the present review period. During the past few years, China has overcome the impact of COVID-19 and it has witnessed steady growth in the volume of its exports. In terms of the proportion in official reserves, the proportion of RMB has increased form 1.2 percent in 2017 to 2.88 percent in Q1 2022. In terms of foreign exchange transactions, and according to the three-yearly BIS survey on foreign exchange and the derivatives, the proportion of RMB foreign exchange transactions has risen from 2.0 percent in 2016 to 2.2 percent in 2019, ranking number eight worldwide. In terms of the liabilities of international debt securities and the banking industry, since 2017 the proportion of international debt securities denominated in RMB has remained at 0.3 percent, and that of the liabilities in the international banking industry denominated in RMB has edged up from 0.8 percent to 1.1 percent, which still has room for growth. Since the official inclusion of the RMB in the SDR basket in 2016, in line with the arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC, together with the relevant departments, has had the courage to take on responsibilities and overcome difficulties by continuously promoting the reform and opening-up of the financial sector and cross-border use of the RMB. Major progress has been made in the market-oriented reform of the RMB interest rates and exchange rate. The opening-up of the financial market has been continuously enhanced. Constant efforts have been made to broaden the investment channels, to enrich the portfolio of investable assets, and to simplify the investment procedures. With continued improvement in the business environment, RMB assets investments by overseas investors have been further facilitated. Currently, overseas investors can trade in the Chinese bond market through channels such as the Northbound Trading, direct trading, and the QFII/RQFII, and they can trade in the Chinese stock market through channelssuch as the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect/Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect and the QFII/RQFII. In addition, they can participate in the trading of Chinese wealth management products and commodity futures through the Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect and designated futures trading. As of end-June 2022, outstanding RMB financial assets held by overseas investors posted RMB 10.1 trillion. Specifically, the volume of both stocks and bonds stood at RMB 3.6 trillion, 5.5 times and 4.3 times those at end-2016, respectively. Meanwhile, the RMB is regarded as the official reserve currency by more economies, and use of the RMB by domestic and overseas entities in cross-border settlements has witnessed steady growth. According to the Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER) statistics released by the IMF, as of end-Q1 2022, the volume of global RMB reserves amounted to USD336.39 billion, accounting for 2.88 percent of official global reserves. Since 2017, the annual growth of cross-border receipts and payments of the RMB under trade in goods and trade in services averaged 15 percent and 17 percent, respectively. The increase in the weight of the RMB means the international community acknowledges the achievements of China in reform and opening-up, which is conducive to further enhancing the role of the RMB as an international reserve currency and to strengthening the international appeal of RMB assets. Going forward, under the unified arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, together with other financial regulators, the PBC will continue to steadfastly promote China’s reform and opening-up of the financial sector, further simplify the procedures for overseas investors to enter the Chinese market, enrich the portfolio of investable assets, improve the disclosure of data, continuously improve the business environment, extend the trading hours of the interbank foreign exchange market, and constantly facilitate investment in the Chinese market, so as to create a more favorable environment for overseas investors and international institutions to invest in China. Part 2. Monetary Policy Operations In Q2 2022, with resolute implementation of the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, and in line with the requirements that COVID-19 should be contained, the economy should be stabilized, and the development should be safe, the PBC soundly conducted a package of policies and measures, enhanced implementation of the sound monetary policy, gave full play to the dual functions of monetary policy tools in adjusting the credit aggregate and structure, guided financial institutions to ramp up support for the real economy, especially for micro and small businesses (MSBs), green development, and tech innovation, earnestly served the real economy, and effectively prevented andcontained financial risks, thereby contributing to sustaining stable macroeconomic performance. I. Conducting open market operations in a flexible manner Flexible operations to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. In Q2 2022, the PBC paid close attention to the changes in the macroeconomic and financial circumstances at home and abroad and took into full consideration the impact of multiple factors related to liquidity supply, such as the Russia-Ukraine conflict, the sporadic COVID-19 resurgences in China, and the advance issuance of government bonds. Adopting a mix of tools, such as the required reserve ratio (RRR) cut, the medium-term lending facility (MLF), central bank lending, and the turning over of surplus profits, the PBC injected medium and long-term liquidity into the banking system. It continued to conduct open market operations on a daily basis, and it kept liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, providing a favorable liquidity environment for the successful issuance of government bonds and for the financial sector to serve the real economy. Due to the sufficient funding supply in the money market, since Q2 the demand of primary dealers for reverse repos operations has witnessed an overall decline in the open market. With respect to fund supply and demand, the PBC flexibly adjusted the scale of open market operations and further enhanced the flexibility and precision of operations. In Q2, the weighted average interest rates of the 7-day repos (DR007) posted 1.72 percent, decreasing 37 basis points and 44 basis points from Q1 and the previous Q2, respectively. Since July, the bidding volume of primary dealers continuously declined, and the PBC correspondingly reduced the volume of repos operations, which could fully satisfy the demand of the bidding institutions. Open-market operations by the PBC is a tool used to adjust short-term liquidity, and it is a normal phenomenon to flexibly adjust the volume with respect to changes in the supply and demand of liquidity. Starting from Q2 2022, the rates paid on the 7-day repos and the MLF have both remained unchanged, which has been conducive to achieving an internal and external equilibrium under the backdrop of interest rate hikes by the major global central banks. Continuously conducting central bank bill swap (CBS) operations. In Q2 2022, the PBC conducted three batches of CBS operations, totaling RMB15 billion. The maturity of each operation was three months, at a fixed rate of 0.10 percent. Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has conducted CBS operations regularly on a monthly basis, and these operations have played a positive role in boosting liquidity in the secondary market of bank-issued perpetual bonds, in supporting the issuance of perpetual bonds to replenish capital by banks, especially by small and medium-sized banks, and in strengthening credit supply capacities.Issuing central bank bills in Hong Kong on a regular basis. In Q2 2022, the PBC issued three batches of RMB-denominated central bank bills in Hong Kong, totaling RMB30 billion. Specifically, the 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year bills registered RMB10 billion, RMB5 billion, and RMB15 billion, respectively. The regular issuance of central bank bills and the development of the central bank bill repos market in Hong Kong enriched the scope of RMB investment products and RMB liquidity management tools in Hong Kong, which played an active role in promoting the sound development of the offshore RMB money market and bond market. II. Conducting medium-term lending facility and standing lending facility operations in a timely manner Conducting MLF operations in a timely manner. In order to ensure an appropriate supply of medium and long-term liquidity and to give play to the signaling and guiding functions of medium-term policy rates for interest rates, the PBC conducted a total of RMB1.65 trillion of MLF operations in H1 2022, all with a maturity of one year and an interest rate of 2.85 percent, which was on par with that at end-2021. In particular, MLF operations conducted in Q2 amounted to RMB450 billion. At end-June, the outstanding MLF registered RMB4.95 trillion, RMB400 billion more than that at the beginning of 2022. Conducting well-timed SLF operations. Locally incorporated financial institutions were provided with a sufficient amount of short-term liquidity support as needed so as to stabilize market expectations, strengthen the stability of liquidity in the bankingsystem, and forestall liquidity risks. In H1, the PBC conducted a total of RMB8.38 billion of standing lending facility (SLF) operations, of which operations in Q2 registered RMB1.96 billion. The balance of SLF operations at end-June posted RMB1.34 billion. The SLF rate served as the ceiling of the interest rate corridor and promoted the smooth operation of the money market. At end-June, the overnight, 7-day, and 1-month SLF rates stood at 2.95 percent, 3.10 percent, and 3.45 percent, respectively, unchanged from those at end-March. III. Lowering the required reserve ratio for financial institutions The required reserve ratio for financial institutions was lowered in an attempt to support the real economy and to promote the steady decline in overall financing costs. The PBC reduced the RRR by 0.25 percentage points, effective on April 25, 2022 (not applicable to financial institutions that had already implemented an RRR of 5 percent). In order to ramp up support for MSBs as well as agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, urban commercial banks operating businesses within the province of registration and rural commercial banks implementing an RRR of over 5 percent enjoyed an additional RRR cut of 0.25 percentage points. The RRR reduction released about RMB530 billion of long-term funds, and after the RRR cut, the weighted average RRR for financial institutions stood at 8.1 percent. The purposes of the RRR cut were as follows. First, it aimed to optimize the funding structure of financial institutions, expand their sources of long-term stable funding, enhance their capabilities to allocate funds, and ramp up support for the real economy. Second, it aimed to guide financial institutions to make good use of the funds released by the RRR cut to support industries as well as micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) that were hard hit by COVID-19. Third, the RRR cut lowered the funding costs for financial institutions by approximately RMB6.5 billion per year, which would promote a reduction in overall financing costs through the transmission of financial institutions. The foreign exchange required reserve ratio was lowered for financial institutions so as to enhance their foreign exchange allocation capabilities. The PBC lowered the foreign exchange required reserve ratio by 1 percentage point, from 9 percent to 8 percent, effective on May 15, 2022, which would release around USD10 billion of foreign exchange liquidity. IV. Further improving the macro prudential management framework The role of the macro prudential assessment (MPA) was given full play to optimize the credit structure and to promote the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. In H1 2022, the PBC further optimized the MPA assessment framework and guided financial institutions to enhance stability in the growth of credit aggregates and to ramp up support for inclusive MSB loans, especially unsecured inclusive MSB loans, for medium and long-term loans to themanufacturing sector, and for green development. The regulatory framework for systemically important financial institutions was improved. To implement the Guiding Opinions on Improving Regulation of Systemically Important Financial Institutions, the PBC and the CBIRC jointly drafted the Assessment Methodology of Systemically Important Insurance Companies (Exposure Draft), soliciting public comments from July 8. The exposure draft stipulates the coverage, methods, procedures, thresholds, and standards for the assessment of China’s systemically important insurance companies. The top ten largest insurance companies (groups) by assets were proposed for assessment in terms of four respects, including business scale, relevance, assets realization, and substitutability. V. Actively giving play to the role of structural monetary policy instruments Actively using central bank lending that supports rural development and MSBs, central bank discounts, and other policy instruments to guide financial institutions to enhance support for key areas and vulnerable spots in the national economy and for coordinated regional development. The PBC continued to leverage the role of central bank lending in providing targeted liquidity and as a positive incentive, which contributed to connecting the consolidation of achievements in poverty eradication with rural revitalization. Central bank lending for supporting rural development and MSBs was utilized to guide locally incorporated financial institutions to expand credit supply for rural revitalization. Central bank lending for poverty alleviation was rolled over according to current regulations so as to consolidate achievements in poverty alleviation. The PBC promoted coordinated regional development by continuously guiding locally incorporated financial institutions in ten provinces to make good use of policy instruments, such as central bank lending, and to expand credit supply for vulnerable parts of the economy within the region, including rural development, MSBs, and private enterprises. Stepped-up efforts were made to provide relief and assistance for MSBs, and locally incorporated financial institutions were guided to employ central bank lending for MSBs and self-employed businesses that were heavily hit by surging commodity prices and COVID-19, so as to reduce their financing costs. At end-June, outstanding central bank lending to support rural development posted RMB540.4 billion. Outstanding central bank lending for MSBs and for poverty alleviation posted RMB1.3997 trillion and RMB165.6 billion, respectively. Outstanding central bank discounts registered RMB614.5 billion. In H1 2022, the PBC made net withdrawals of pledged supplementary lending (PSLs) in the amount of RMB181.4 billion from development and policy banks, with the outstanding PSLs registering RMB2.6203 trillion at end-June. Continuously implementing instruments in support of inclusive MSB loans to bolster the development of MSBs. In January, according to the decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council, from the beginning of 2022 to end-June 2023, for inclusive MSB loans issued by locally incorporated banks, the PBC would provide funding on a quarterly basis in the amount of 1 percent of the incremental balance of these loans so as to encourage banks to extend inclusive MSB loans. In May, according to the new decisions of the executive meetings of the State Council, the PBC made an adjustment to the aforementioned supportive policy, lifting the proportion of funding support from 1 percent to 2 percent, effective from the beginning of Q2 2022. In Q2, the PBC provided RMB8.337 billion of funding to locally incorporated financial institutions, facilitating an increase of RMB419.3 billion in inclusive MSB loans. Simultaneously implementing both the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending facility for the clean and efficient use of coal, so as to support the green and low-carbon transition of the economy. In May, the quota for special central bank lending was increased by RMB100 billion to support sectors relevant to the development and use of coal and the enhancement of the coal reserve capacity. In Q2, through these two instruments, the PBC provided relevant institutions with RMB44.1 billion and RMB14.8 billion, respectively, or total funding of RMB58.9 billion. Since implementation of these two instruments, the PBC has cumulatively provided RMB182.7 billion and RMB35.7 billion, respectively, up to a total of RMB218.4 billion. Establishing the special central bank lending facility for the transport and logistics sectors to support road freight transport enterprises and truck drivers that were severely hit by COVID-19. According to the decisions of the State Council’s executive meetings, with the aim of providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives and in line with market-oriented principles, the PBC established the special central bank lending facility for the transport and logistics sectors. In May, the PBC and the Ministry of Transport jointly issued Notice on Establishing Special Central Bank Lending for the Transport and Logistics Sectors (Yinfa No.120 [2022]). The facility adopts a “reimbursement” mechanism whereby financial institutions are “reimbursed” on a quarterly basis. Specifically, financial institutions are subject to their own decision-making at their own risk, and they can apply for funding support from the PBC under the special central bank lending facility after they grant loans to eligible enterprises in the relevant industries. For qualified loans, the PBC provides funding for 100 percent of the principal through central bank lending, with an interest rate of 1.75 percent. Accelerating implementation of the three policy instruments for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and the transport and logistics sectors, respectively. As scheduled, the first application of the special central bank lendingfacilities for sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care, and the transport and logistics sectors will be open in July, and the PBC is now making orderly preparations for it. VI. Bringing into play the role of credit policy in guiding structural reforms The long-term mechanisms for providing financial services for MSBs are taking shape. To address the financial institutions’ lack of intrinsic motivations to serve MSBs and inefficient external incentives and restraints, the PBC issued the Notice on Promoting the Establishment of Long-Term Mechanisms for Boosting the Confidence, Willingness, Capability, and Professionalism of Financial Institutions to Lend to Micro and Small Businesses. The Notice urges financial institutions to improve error tolerance and risk mitigation mechanisms, boost positive incentives and evaluation and assessment criteria, ensure funds availability and build funding channels, promote technological empowerment and product innovation, and enhance their willingness, capacity, and sustainability to serve MSBs, so as to boost the volume and coverage of financing for MSBs and to reduce the costs. As of end-June, outstanding inclusive loans to MSBs registered RMB22 trillion, with a year-on-year growth of 23.8 percent. The loans supported 52.39 million MSBs, increasing 36.8 percent year on year. The weighted average rate on new inclusive MSB loans posted 4.82 percent in June, dropping 37 basis points from May. Financial support for rural revitalization has been enhanced. The PBC facilitated implementation of the Opinions on Ensuring Financial Support for Full Promotion of Key Rural Revitalization Initiatives in 2022 to guide financial institutions to strengthen financial safeguards for food security, increase financial support for a strong foundation for modern agriculture, and for the sustainable development of rural industries, and to encourage all types of financial institutions to tap into medium- and long-term credit models in support of agricultural and rural infrastructure. The PBC conducted appraisals and evaluations of financial institutions serving rural revitalization for 2021. Application of the evaluation results has been strengthened to further improve the quality and efficiency of financial services in promotion of rural revitalization. As of end-June 2022, outstanding agro-related loans registered RMB47.1 trillion, growing 13.1 percent year on year. Box 3 Changes in the Credit Structure in Recent Years Changes in the credit structure reflect changes in the economic structure. They also promote development of the real economy. Since 2010, facilitated by accelerating urbanization, economic transition, as well as stabilization and structural policies, thecredit structure in China witnessed changes featuring the following characteristics: the share of loans to the manufacturing sector bottomed out; the share of inclusive loans to MSBs steadily increased; the share of loans to the infrastructure sector dropped slowly from a high level; and the share of loans to the real estate sector first surged and then turned downward. The credit structure has improved, particularly since 2019. Roughly speaking, of the RMB206 trillion loans outstanding at end-June 2022, inclusive MSB loans and loans to the manufacturing sector comprised 10 percent each, and loans to infrastructure and real estate comprised 20 percent and 25 percent, respectively. Financial support for inclusive MSBs has been increasing in recent years.From a credit demand perspective, an improved economic structure and the need for high-quality development were the main driving forces toward credit structure optimization. This is reflected first in the bottom-out and rebound of the proportion of manufacturing sector loans. The 14th Five-Year Plan set for a basically stable proportion of the manufacturing industry, relying on support from the financial sector. Under efforts by various parties, the downward trend in the proportion of manufacturing sector loans was put to a stop after the figure dropped from 17 percent in 2010 to 9 percent in 2020. It then increased to 9.4 percent at end-June 2022. In particular, medium- and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector maintained high growth of more than 20 percent since June 2020. The combined growing quantity and improved term structure buttressed the bottom-out of the manufacturing value added as a share of GDP, which recovered from its lowest point of 26.3 percent in 2020 to 29 percent at end-June 2022. Second, inclusive loans to MSBs surged and delivered significant corporate and public benefits. Outstanding inclusive MSB loans at end-June 2022 posted RMB22 trillion, which was 2.7 times the amount at end-2018. The proportion of these loans at end-June rose to 10.6 percent. Meanwhile, thenumber of MSBs granted these loans reached 52.39 million, 2.9 times the number at end-2018. Third, the credit demand of capital-intensive industries, including infrastructure and real estate, turned downward. As the infrastructure investment structure leaned toward urban renovation, utilities, and other public welfare areas, credit demand for traditional infrastructure projects such as railways and highways subdued. The proportion of loans to this sector dropped accordingly, from 25 percent in 2010 to about 19 percent since 2019. The proportion of real estate loans also declined from the peak of 29 percent in 2019 to 25.7 percent at end-June 2022. From a credit supply perspective, the PBC continuously improved the structural monetary policy instruments to meet the demand for high-quality economic development and to leverage the role of credit policy in guiding structural reforms. The PBC increased the quota for central bank lending for rural development,and MSBs and central bank discounts, and set up a number of structural monetary instruments, including support instruments for inclusive MSB loans, the CERF and special central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use, central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, special central bank lending for inclusive elderly care, and special central bank lending for transportation and logistics. These structural policy instruments are focused, reasonable, appropriate, and flexible. Meanwhile, a working mechanism was established under which financial institutions issue loans independently and practice ledger management; the PBC offers reimbursements and sets the limits; and relevant authorities specify loan purposes and carry out random inspections. This connected loans issued by financial institutions to central bank lending. It created an incentive-compatible mechanism through low-cost central bank lending or incentive funds, which encourages financial institutions to improve their credit structure and channels more financial resources to inclusive finance, green development, and sci-tech innovation. Since 2018, together with the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission, the PBC guided financial institutions to strengthen support for inclusive finance and MSBs through a mix of policy measures and regulatory appraisals. The PBC promoted the establishment of long-term mechanisms for supporting MSBs and played its role in precisely guiding optimization of the credit structure. Looking forward, credit growth will be adaptive to Chinese economic progress gearing from high growth to quality growth. A stable aggregate and sound structure will be prioritized. It should be noted that the marginal deceleration of urbanization and the changing trend in long-term real estate cycles have weakened the traditionally massive demand for loans to the infrastructure and real estate sectors. Meanwhile, as inclusive MSB loans and loans to high-tech manufacturing are still small in volume and direct financing is on the rise, credit growth may drop during the shift of growth drivers and in the adjustment process of the financing structure.However, this is consistent with the economy’s new normal. It does not mean that financial support to the real economy is diminishing, and the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the economy will still be in line with nominal economic growth. In the medium to long term, credit growth in China will focus more on stable aggregates and sound structures. New growth drivers, such as green investment, new infrastructure, new urbanization initiatives, and major projects, can to some extent provide support for credit growth. In addition, credit resources will continue leaning toward key areas and weak links, and the quality and suitability of financial support for new growth drivers will be steadily improved. According to relevant research institutes, the investment demand in China’s green transition toward emissions peak and carbon neutrality exceeds RMB100 trillion. In the 14th Five-Year Plan period, new infrastructure investment is estimated to be more than RMB10 trillion. Therefore, these investments will likely deliver an annual average of RMB5 trillion in the upcoming period. In the next stage, the PBC will adapt to the requirements of the new development stage, maintain the sound monetary policy, further facilitate improvement in the credit structure, ensure more efficient financial resource allocations, accelerate building and improving systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, and work to achieve a dynamic equilibrium between stable aggregates and sound structures. To achieve this, first, it is necessary for the PBC to properly manage the relationship between traditional growth drivers and new structural growth potentials by “simultaneously phasing out the old and setting up the new, and securing faster progress on the latter,” so as to enhance the stability of credit aggregate growth and save time for fostering new growth drivers. Second, it is necessary to seize a favorable time window for “setting up” new growth drivers. The PBC will guide credit resources toward key areas of economic transition and delve into green investment, the renovation of old urban communities, high-tech manufacturing, sci-tech innovation, and other structural potentials, so as to facilitate a virtuous circle between finance and the real economy. VII. Deepening the market-oriented interest rate reform Since the beginning of 2022, the PBC has continued to deepen the market-oriented interest rate reform. The benefits of the loan prime rate (LPR) reform were continuously unleashed, while the regulations over deposit interest rates were improved, thus further bringing down the actual loan rates. First, the LPR reform was further promoted, and the guiding role of the LPR was brought into play. The PBC guided the one-year and above-five-year LPR to decrease by 0.1 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively, while it lowered the SLF rate by 0.1 percentage points. As a result, actual corporate loan rates remained stable with a slight decline, and corporate financing costs were lowered significantly. In June, the weighted average lending rate dropped by 0.52 percentage points year on year to 4.41 percent, and the weightedaverage interest rate on corporate loans fell by 0.42 percentage points to 4.16 percent. Second, the market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit rates was established, further promoting the market-oriented pricing of deposit rates. The monitoring of deposit rates was further strengthened, with deposit rate pricing behavior for agreement deposits and other deposit products further regulated, urging financial institutions to conduct agreement deposit businesses in compliance with the laws and regulations. Third, conversion of the domestic financial market benchmark rate from the LIBOR was actively promoted. Major domestic banks have already been prepared for the conversion of the pricing benchmark for businesses affected by the LIBOR expiration, while most of the new foreign-currency-denominated floating-rate businesses in domestic markets have switched their benchmark from the LIBOR to alternative benchmark rates. VIII. Improving the market-based RMB exchange rate formation mechanism The PBC continued to advance the market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate and to improve the managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. The PBC attached importance to guiding expectations, enhanced the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, and kept the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, while giving play to the role of the exchange rate as an automatic stabilizer in adjusting the macro economy and the balance of payments. In H1 2022, the highest and lowest RMB central parities against the USD were 6.3014 and 6.7898, respectively. During the 117 trading days, the RMB appreciated on 58 days and depreciated on 59 days. The biggest intraday appreciation and depreciation was 1.1 percent (731 bps) and 1.0 percent (681 bps), respectively. The RMB exchange rate against major international currencies experienced both appreciations and depreciations, floating in both directions. At end-June, the central parity of the RMB against the dollar depreciated 5.0 percent from end-2021, while the central parities of the RMB against the euro, the pound, and the Japanese yen appreciated 3.0 percent, 5.8 percent, and 12.8 percent, respectively, during the same period. Since the reform of the RMB exchange rate formation mechanism that commenced in 2005 to end-June 2022, the RMB appreciated by a cumulative total of 23.3 percent, 42.9 percent, and 48.7 percent, respectively, against the dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen. Meanwhile, direct RMB trading was rather buoyant in the interbank foreign exchange market with stable liquidity, which helped lower the exchange costs of microeconomic entities and facilitated bilateral trade and investment.As of end-June, under the bilateral currency swap agreements between the PBC and the foreign monetary authorities, the foreign monetary authorities utilized a total of RMB59.906 billion and the PBC utilized foreign currencies equivalent to USD381 million. These operations played an active role in promoting bilateral trade and investment.IX. Forestalling and defusing financial risks and deepening the reform of financial institutions New achievements were made to forestall and defuse financial risks. The PBC remained committed to addressing risks in a market- and law-based manner, with total financial risks decreasing. Addressing the risks of high-risk groups was steadily advanced, risks associated with small and medium-sized banks were prevented and defused, and financial risks in key regions and areas were orderly mitigated. The results from the central bank rating of financial institutions in Q4 2021 indicated that, among the 4,398 banking financial institutions being rated throughout the nation, financial institutions within the safety boundary took up 93 percent of the total number and 99 percent of the total assets of all rated institutions, with central bank ratings for the overwhelming majority of small and medium-sized banks staying within the safety range. Meanwhile, the central bank rating of financial institutions in Q1 2022 has also been completed. The PBC strengthened risk monitoring andearly-warning on banks and it conducted stress tests on over 4,000 banking financial institutions. In response to the emerging problems of banks with early warnings, the PBC made timely corrections to ensure early identification and resolution of risks. Reform of development and policy financial institutions was continuously deepened. The PBC worked to comprehensively implement reform plans for development and policy financial institutions to redefine their responsibilities and business scopes, apply classified accounting, improve corporate governance, strengthen restraint mechanisms, and prevent financial risks. The PBC guided development and policy financial institutions to fulfill their responsibilities, focus on their main businesses, and give full play to their roles in supporting economic restructuring and high-quality development on the basis of strengthened risk prevention and control. X. Deepening the reform of foreign exchange arrangements Stepping up facilitation for foreign exchange business. On April 18, the PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) jointly issued the Notice on Strengthening Financial Services for COVID-19 Containment and Socio-Economic Development to roll out a batch of foreign exchange supporting measures, such as expanding the policy for facilitating trade-related foreign exchange payments and receipts of quality enterprises nationwide, carrying out the pilot program on external debt facilitation quotas, allowing the sale and use of foreign currency–denominated loans that are domestically issued with an export trading background, and improving exchange-rate risk management services for enterprises. Supporting cross-border financing for high-tech enterprises and “specialized, sophisticated, distinctive, and innovative” companies. On May 31, the SAFE issued the Notice on Supporting High-tech Enterprises and SSDI (Specialized, Sophisticated, Distinctive, and Innovative) Companies for Carrying Out Pilot Programs to Facilitate Cross-border Financing. According to the Notice, the pilot programs will be expanded to facilitate independent overseas borrowing within a certain quota by more eligible enterprises, thus helping such enterprises to accelerate their innovation and development. First, more regions will be included, with the coverage expanding from specific areas in nine provinces and cities to the whole areas of seventeen provinces and cities; Second, more types of enterprises will be encompassed, with SSDI companies added in addition to high-tech enterprises. Third, the amount of overseas borrowing will be increased, and the facilitation quota of USD10 million will apply to all eligible enterprises, including high-tech enterprises and SSDI companies in nine provinces and cities that have already carried out the pilot programs.Enhancing the coverage and quality of facilitation policies for quality enterprises. The policy for facilitating trade-related foreign exchange payments and receipts of quality enterprises was expanded nationwide, with the four provinces and autonomous regions of Heilongjiang, Tibet, Ningxia, and Guizhou added in the second quarter. Trade-related foreign exchange settlements for quality enterprises now feature “application in seconds, and completion in minutes.” As of end-June, 202 banks have conducted 1.215 million business facilitations for 2,869 enterprises, with the amount totaling USD770.4 billion. Part 3. Financial Market Conditions In H1 2022, performance of the financial market was generally stable. Money market interest rates featured a downward movement, with transaction activities picking up. The scale of bond issuances rose year on year, with government bonds delivering notable results. Yield curves of government securities moved downward. The stock market rallied, with turnover increasing year on year. In the insurance industry, premium revenue declined year on year, while asset growth accelerated. I. Financial market overview 1. Money market interest rates witnessed a marked decline, with active market transactions In June 2022, the monthly weighted average interest rate for interbank lending was 1.56 percent, and the monthly weighted average interest rate for pledged repos posted 1.57 percent, 46 basis points, and 52 basis points lower than those in December 2021, respectively. The monthly weighted average interest rate of government-backed bond pledged repos among depository institutions posted 1.44 percent, 13 basis points lower than the monthly weighted average interest rate of pledged repos in the interbank market. At end-June, the overnight and 7-day Shibor posted 1.90 percent and 2.20 percent, respectively, down 23 basis points and 7 basis points from end-December 2021, respectively. Market transactions were active. In H1 2022, the volume of bond repos trading on the interbank market reached RMB630 trillion, representing an average daily turnover of RMB5.2 trillion, up 33.7 percent year on year. The volume of cumulative trading in interbank lending registered RMB67.3 trillion, with an average daily turnover of RMB551.5 billion and a year-on-year increase of 15.8 percent. In terms of the maturity structure, overnight repos accounted for 85.6 percent of the total turnover in bond repos, increasing 2 percentage points year on year, and overnight lendingconstituted 88.3 percent of the total turnover in interbank lending, down 0.9 percentage points year on year. The volume of bond repos trading on the exchange markets increased 23.4 percent year on year to RMB192.8 trillion.Interbank Certificates of Deposits (CDs) and negotiable CD businesses operated orderly. In H1 2022, about 13,000 interbank CDs were issued on the interbank market, raising RMB10.8 trillion. The total volume of trading on the secondary market registered RMB107.7 trillion. At end-June, outstanding interbank CDs reached RMB14.7 trillion. The weighted average interest rate of 3-month interbank CDs was 2.25 percent, 2 basis points lower than that of the 3-month Shibor. In H1 2022, about 30,000 negotiable CDs were issued by financial institutions, raising RMB7.5 trillion, an increase of RMB1.3 trillion year on year.Interest rate swap transactions decreased. In H1 2022, the RMB interest rate swap market witnessed 105,000 transactions, decreasing 25.7 percent year on year, with the volume of the notional principal totaling RMB8.4 trillion, a decrease of 24.1 percent year on year. In terms of the maturity structure, contracts with maturities of up to one year traded most briskly, and the volume of the notional principal posted RMB5.5 trillion, accounting for 65.0 percent of the principal of all maturities. The 7-day fixing repo rate and the Shibor served as the main reference rates for the floating leg of the RMB interest rate swaps, accounting for 88.1 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively, of the total notional principal of the interest rate swaps. In H1 2022, interest rate swaps anchored to the loan prime rate (LPR) witnessed 488 transactions, with RMB75.46 billion of the notional principal.The interest rate options business developed at a steady pace. The LPR options business was officially launched on the interbank market in March 2020 and the fixing repo rate (FDR) options were newly added to the interbank market on March 29, 2021. In H1 2022, a total of 307 interest rate options transactions were concluded, totaling RMB41.07 billion. Specifically, six were interest rate swap transactions, amounting to RMB1.70 billion of the notional principal, and 301 were interest rate cap/floor transactions, amounting to RMB39.37 billion of the notional principal. 2. The coupon rates of bonds generally declined, while bond issuances expanded with active trading of spot bonds Coupon rates of bonds generally declined. In June 2022, the yield on 10-year government securities issued by the Ministry of Finance was 2.74 percent, 9 basis points lower than that in December 2021. The coupon rate of 10-year financial bonds issued by the China Development Bank (CDB) was 2.95 percent, 7 basis points lower than the rate in December 2021. The average rate of 1-year short-term financing bills (bond rating A-1) issued by AAA-rated enterprises was 3.38 percent, 31 basis points higher than the rate in December 2021.The term spreads of government securities yields expanded. At end-June 2022, yields on 1-year and 3-year government securities decreased by 29 basis points and 1 basis point to 1.95 percent and 2.45 percent from end-December 2021, respectively; yields on 5-year, 7-year, and 10-year government securities increased by 4 basis points, 6 basis points, and 5 basis points to 2.65 percent, 2.84 percent, and 2.82 percent, respectively, from end-December 2021. The term spread between 1-year and 10-year government securities was 87 basis points, expanding 34 basis points from end-December 2021. Bond issuances increased year on year. In H1 2022, the cumulative value of bond issuances increased by 7 percent, or RMB2.1 trillion, year on year to RMB31.5 trillion, driven mostly by surges in government bonds and debt-financing instruments issued by non-financial institutions. At end-June 2022, outstanding bonds held in custody amounted to RMB141.7 trillion, representing an increase of 14.6 percent year on year. The volume of spot bond transactions witnessed rapid growth. In H1 2022, the value of cash bonds trading on the bond market posted RMB144.1 trillion, registering an increase of 33.1 percent year on year. Specifically, the value of cash bonds trading on the interbank market was RMB124.3 trillion, representing an increase of 28.6 percent year on year. The value of cash bond transactions on the stock exchanges totaled RMB19.7 trillion, an increase of 71.4 percent year on year.3. Bill financing saw steady growth, and interest rates on the bill market were basically stable The bill acceptance business recorded stable growth. In H1 2022, commercial drafts issued by enterprises totaled RMB14.1 trillion, rising 14.3 percent year on year. At end-H1, outstanding commercial drafts stood at RMB16.6 trillion, increasing by 16.0 percent year on year. At end-June, outstanding commercial draft acceptances grew by RMB1.6567 trillion and RMB882.1 billion compared to the beginning of 2022 and end-March, respectively. Of the outstanding bankers’ acceptances, 67.7 percent was issued by micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Bill financing witnessed steady growth, with generally stable interest rates. In H1 2022, total discounts by financial institutions amounted to RMB28.9 trillion, growing 21.2 percent year on year. At end-June, the balance of bill financing was RMB12.0 trillion, up 39.4 percent year on year. The balance accounted for 5.8 percent of the total outstanding loans, up 1.2 percentage points year on year. The interest rates forbill financing first increased and then decreased, remaining generally stable. 4. The stock indices recovered while turnover expanded year on year The stock indices recovered. At end-June 2022, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index closed at 3,399 points, increasing by 4.5 percent from end-March. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component Index closed at 12,896 points, increasing by 6.4 percent from end-March. Turnover on the stock markets expanded year on year. In H1 2022, the combined turnover on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange reached RMB114.4 trillion, and the average daily turnover was RMB977.9 billion, representing an increase of 7.2 percent year on year. The amount of funds raised on the stock markets decreased year on year. In H1, a cumulative fund of RMB567.3 billion was raised, decreasing by 13.8 percent year on year. 5. Premium income decreased year on year and the growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated In H1 2022, total premium income in the insurance sector amounted to RMB2.8 trillion, down 0.4 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.4 percentage points compared to that recorded in 2021. Claim and benefit payments totaled RMB776.8 billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 1.5 percent. Specifically, total property insurance claims and benefit payments increased by 1.4 percent year on year, and total life insurance claims and benefit payments went up by 1.7 percent year on year.The growth of assets in the insurance sector accelerated. At end-June 2022, total assets in the insurance sector increased 7.5 percent year on year to RMB26.6 trillion, an acceleration of 0.7 percentage points from end-2021. Specifically, bank deposits increased by 4.6 percent, while investment-linked assets increased by 6 percent year on year.6. The turnover of spot and swap foreign exchange transactions remained generally stable In H1 2022, the cumulative turnover of spot RMB/foreign exchange transactions registered USD3.8 trillion, a decrease of 23 percent year on year. The cumulative turnover of swap RMB/foreign exchange transactions totaled USD9.8 trillion, an increase of 5.5 year on year. Specifically, cumulative overnight RMB/USD swap transactions posted USD6.5 trillion, accounting for 65.7 percent of the total swap turnover. The turnover of RMB/foreign exchange forward transactions totaled USD67.6 billion, rising 29.4 percent year on year. The turnover of foreign currency pair transactions totaled USD691.2 billion, increasing by 13.5 percent year on year. In particular, the EUR/USD pair registered the largest trading volume, accounting for 55.5 percent of the total market share. 7. The volume of gold trading expanded year on year, while prices went down At end-June 2022, international gold prices closed at USD1,817 per ounce, representing a decrease of 6.4 percent from end-March. The Au99.99 on the Shanghai Gold Exchange closed at RMB391.7 per gram, decreasing by 0.6 percent from end-March. In Q2 2022, the volume of gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange was 9,699.98 tons, representing growth of 6.5 percent year on year. Turnover posted RMB3.87 trillion, representing growth of 12 percent year on year. II. Development of institutional arrangements in the financial markets 1. Institutional arrangements in the bond market Institutional arrangements in the bond market were improved. In April 2022, the PBC and the CBIRC jointly released the Notice on the Issuance of Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Eligible Non-Capital Bonds by Global Systemically Important Banks (Yinfa No. 100 [2022]), which specified core elements and regulations for the issuance of total loss-absorbing capacity eligible non-capital bonds. The Notice provides the basis for the orderly issuance of the said bonds by global systemically important banks. The bond market was further opened up in a high-quality manner. In May 2022, the PBC, CSRC, and SAFE jointly released the Matters Concerning Further Facilitating Investment in China’s Bond Market by Overseas Institutional Investors (Announcement No.4 [2022] of the PBC, CSRC, and SAFE). Based on the principle of “one set of rules, one bond market,” the Announcement further facilitates overseas institutional investments in China’s bond market by unifying and improving relevant policy requirements and cross-border fund supervision. 2. Reform and institutional arrangements in the securities marketFundamental institutional arrangements for the capital market were improved. On April 20, 2022, the 34th session of the 13th NPC Standing Committee passed the Futures and Derivative Law of the People's Republic of China, which came into force on August 1, 2022. Aiming at serving the real economy, forestalling and controlling financial risks, and deepening financial reform, the Law stipulates the basic rules for the futures and derivative markets in a comprehensive and systematic manner, thus filling the gaps in the legal framework of the capital market. The reform of the registration-based IPO system was pressed ahead in a stable manner. In April 2022, the CSRC released the Guiding Opinions on Improving Post-Delisting Supervision of Listed Companies, which improves the delisting mechanism of listed companies and helps create a sound environment for smooth market entry and exit. In May, the CSRC released the Provisions on Piloting the Business of Trading Stocks on the Sci-Tech Innovation Board by Securities Companies as Market Makers, which helps introducing the market maker mechanism to the sci-tech innovation board in a bid to improve stock liquidity and market resilience. In May, the CSRC revised and released the Guidelines for Due Diligence Work of Sponsors and the Guidelines for Working Papers on the Sponsor Business for Securities Issuances and Listings, aiming to further improve the quality of sponsors’ due diligence work as well as the working paper system of sponsor business. In May, the CSRC, MOJ, and MOF jointly released the Opinions on Strengthening the Supervision of the Cleanliness of Intermediaries under the Registration-based IPO System, for the purposes of regulating the cleanliness of intermediaries and their staff members, facilitating the cracking down on financial corruption along with the forestalling and controlling of financial risks, and safeguarding the reform of the registration-based IPO system. Judicial guarantees for the NEEQ were strengthened. In June 2022, the Supreme People’s Court released the Several Opinions on Providing Judicial Guarantees for Deepening the Reform of the NEEQ and the Establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange, which brings judicial functions into full play and provides strong judicial guarantees for investors to grow more comfortable with investing and for SMEs to be bold in blazing new trails and starting up businesses. 3. Institutional arrangements in the insurance market The investment of insurance funds was regulated. In April 2022, the CBIRC revised and released the Notice on the Investment of Insurance Funds in Relevant Financial Products. In the Notice, wealth management products of wealth management companies, single asset management plans, and debt-to-equity swap plans are included in the scope of investable financial products. It is also stipulated that insurance asset management companies shall undertake active management responsibilities, such as due diligence, investment decision-making, andpost-investment management. Furthermore, the requirement for look-through regulation was enhanced, investments in single asset management products were regulated, and requirements for post-investment management were improved. In May, the CBIRC revised and released the Rules on Entrusted Investments of Insurance Funds. The revised Rules delete the requirements on securities companies and fund management companies as investment managers, clarify the boundary between the principal-agent relationship and the trust relationship involved in insurance fund investment, and enrich the rights, responsibilities, obligations, and prohibited behavior by both trustors and trustees. The reform to standardize the insurance industry was advanced. In May 2022, the CBIRC released the 14th Five-Year Plan for the Standardization of China's Insurance Industry. It is proposed in the Plan that by 2025, China will have built a well-organized, comprehensive, and effective system for insurance standards, and it will have established more standards in areas of the insurance industry, such as core businesses, important services, and key technology. In terms of insurance standardization, China will build more exemplary institutions, raise greater awareness, and deepen international communications and cooperation. Related-party transactions in insurance fund investments were regulated. In May 2022, the CBIRC released the Notice on Strengthening Supervision of Related-Party Transactions in Insurance Institutions’ Fund Investments. The Notice specifies the basic principles, division of responsibilities, and prohibited behavior for related-party transactions in insurance fund investment, requires that insurance institutions strengthen the management of related parties, cooperative institutions, approval and decision-making processes, and information disclosures. It also clarifies the key points of supervision, enriches the supervisory measures, and gives full play to the role of industrial self-disciplinary organizations. Part 4. Macroeconomic Overview I. Global economic and financial developments As high inflation is becoming the greatest challenge to the global economy, the central banks in the major advanced economies are tightening monetary policy at a faster pace. This, coupled with intermittent outbreaks of COVID-19, rising geopolitical tensions, and energy and food crises, has weakened growth momentum in the global economy. Large swings in financial markets and the risks of a hard landing in some economies merit attention.1. Economic performance and financial markets in the major economies Economic growth momentum weakened. In the US, the gross domestic product (GDP) fell 0.9 percent at an annualized pace in the second quarter, the second straight quarterly decline. In June, the University of Michigan’s Consumer Sentiment Index dropped to a record low of 50, and the Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) fell to a two-year low of 53. In the euro area, the GDP grew 0.7 percent in the second quarter on a quarterly basis, higher than the growth of 0.5 percent in the first quarter. However, some leading indicators worsened. In June, the Consumer Confidence Index in the euro area fell to –23.8, the second lowest after the –24.4 in April 2020, while the manufacturing PMI hit a 22-month-low of 52.1. The Japanese economy contracted 0.5 percent on an annualized basis in the first quarter. In their latest reports, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank revised downward their global growth forecasts for this year, by 0.4 and 0.3 percentage points, to 3.2 percent and 2.9 percent, respectively. Inflation remained elevated. In June, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) was up by 9.1 percent in the US and by 9.4 percent in the UK compared with the previous year, both reaching a 40-year high. The Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the euro area rose by 8.6 percent over the prior year, also a new record high since the statistics became available. In the emerging markets, the CPI in India and South Africa both went up by more than 7 percent in June, the CPI in Russia and the IPCA in Brazil rose by over 10 percent, while the CPI in Argentina and Turkey surged by 64 percent and 78.6 percent, respectively. Structural supply shortages remained in the job markets, while growth of labor demand moderated. On the one hand, labor supply shortages remain a main problem in the major advanced economies. Job vacancies in the US hit 10.698 million in June, about 1.8 vacancies for each registered unemployed, exceeding 10 million for thirteen consecutive months. On the other hand, labor demand started to fall. The employment index, one component of the manufacturing PMI, was 49.6 in May, dropping below 50 for the first time in nearly nine months, and it fell further to 47.3 in June. As downward pressures on economic growth increase, firms are more reluctant to hire, which may push up the jobless rate from the current low levels. Going forward, labor supply shortages and weakening labor demand may continue to coexist in the major advanced economies for some time. Volatility increased in global financial markets. First, stock indices declined. At the end of June, the S&P 500 and the STOXX50 slumped over 20 percent from their peaks in January, technically entering a bear market. Second, the bond market was sluggish. In the first half of this year, the yield on 10-year government bonds in theUS, Germany, and the UK went up by 146, 165, and 127 basis points (bps), respectively, while the yield jumped higher on government bonds issued by the southern European countries with weak fiscal positions. Third, the foreign exchange market fluctuated sharply. The US dollar strengthened as monetary policies in the advanced economies diverged. In mid-July, the euro dropped below its parity against the US dollar several times, and the Japanese yen depreciated by more than 15 percent against the US dollar in the first half of 2022, both marking record lows in nearly twenty years. Fourth, the commodity market was volatile. The prices of energy, metals, and agricultural products soared in the wake of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, and most of them peaked in early March. Afterwards, energy prices fluctuated at high levels, while the prices of metals and agricultural products dropped noticeably. In particular, the prices of copper, aluminum, and zinc have already fallen back to their levels in the fourth quarter of 2021.2. Monetary policies of the major economies The major advanced economies quickened their pace of monetary policy tightening. The Federal Reserve (Fed) hiked the federal funds rate by 50 bps in May and by 75 bps in June and July to a target range of 2.25–2.5 percent, the biggest single rate hike since November 1994. In its June dot plot, the median forecast for the federal funds rate at the end of 2022 was 3.25–3.5 percent, which means a total hike of 325 bps this year, higher than the forecast in the March dot plot. In addition, from June the Fed began reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, initially by USD30 billion and USD17.5 billion per month, respectively, which would then increase to USD60 billion and USD35 billion after three months. The European Central Bank increased the interest rate on its main refinancing operations, marginal lending facility, and deposit facility each by 50 bps in July, its first rate hike in eleven years and putting an end to eight years of negative interest rates. In the meantime, it created the Transmission Protection Instrument to ensure smooth transmission of monetary policy across the euro area so as to meet the price stability objective. The Bank of England (BOE) raised the Bank Rate in May and June, each by 25 bps to 1.25 percent. At its May meeting, the BOE’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) announced that it would consider beginning the process of selling UK government bonds. The Bank of Japan maintained a loose monetary policy. Among the other central banks, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Reserve Bank of Australia, and the Bank of Korea all raised rates twice in the second quarter, by a total of 100 bps, 100 bps, 75 bps, and 50 bps, respectively. Several emerging economies continued to raise interest rates. To address domestic inflationary pressures and the spillovers of monetary policy tightening in the advanced economies, some emerging economies continued with their rate hikes. In the second quarter, the central banks in Brazil, Mexico, India, and the Philippines all increased their rates twice by a total of 150 bps, 125 bps, 90 bps, and 50 bps, respectively, while the central banks in South Africa and Malaysia hiked their benchmark rates once, by 50 bps and 25 bps, respectively. 3. Issues and trends that merit attention High inflation has already become the biggest challenge facing the global economy. According to the IMF, the average annual growth of the global CPI was 3.9 percent for the first two decades of this century (from 2000 to 2019). The advanced economies experienced a great moderation and a period of low inflation when their annual CPI averaged only 1.8 percent. However, this trend changed in 2021 and was reversed this year, with clear signs of higher inflation. In the short term, factors contributing to higher inflation include the earlier massive stimuli by the advancedeconomies, the supply bottleneck exacerbated by the resurgence of COVID-19, global energy and food supply strains caused by geopolitical tensions, wage-price spirals amplified by the mismatch between demand and supply of labor, and the second-order effects of rising inflation expectations in overseas markets. In the medium and long term, dividends from global integration and abundant labor supply, which kept inflation subdued for the first two decades of this century, have been reversed. This, in tandem with the energy transition and the rising costs of industrial chain restructuring, will make inflation stay elevated longer than it was in previous episodes. The major advanced economies face a monetary policy dilemma, as their growth momentum has weakened. Energy supply strains in Europe and some other regions may add to the difficulties faced by firms and households and may weigh on an economic recovery. Global confirmed daily new cases of COVID-19 have gone up again since June, fueled by the Omicron BA.5 variant, creating new uncertainties for global economic prospects. High inflation has made the policy trade-off even more difficult for the central banks in the major advanced economies. A looser-than-warranted monetary policy is likely to trigger a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, while a tighter-than-warranted monetary policy will increase the risks of a hard landing. The emerging economies and the developing countries are facing the risk of a perfect storm: rising inflation, slower growth, debt overhang, currency depreciation, food crisis, and energy crisis. The World Bank projects the potential growth of the emerging economies and the developing countries for the next decade to be 0.6 percentage points lower than that in the pre-COVID-19 period. Meanwhile, less accommodative global financial conditions have increased the debt servicing burden on low-income countries. According to the IMF, more than 30 percent of the emerging economies and the developing countries are in or on the verge of debt difficulties. In the low-income countries, that percentage is 60 percent. Large swings in global financial markets and a persistent currency depreciation in the emerging economies may further trigger chain reactions, dealing a heavy blow to the financially vulnerable market entities. The Institute of International Finance estimates that the emerging markets saw a net capital outflow for four successive months, from March to June, with the total net outflow exceeding USD20 billion. In addition, food and energy security challenges loom large. According to the United Nations, nearly 800 million people worldwide are suffering from hunger, and the world is heading toward the worst food crisis since World War II. II. Macroeconomic developments in China In H1, due to the complicated and rapidly changing international environment andunexpected sporadic domestic outbreaks of the pandemic, China’s economy faced increasing downward pressures. Pandemic containment and economic and social development in all regions and departments across the country were coordinated in an effective way, with an emphasis on adjustment of the macro policies. As positive results have been achieved in pandemic containment, a series of measures to stabilize growth has delivered results, which buttress stable performance of the economy with good momentum. According to preliminary statistics, GDP in H1 grew by 2.5 percent year on year to RMB56.2642 trillion on a comparable basis. Specifically, GDP in Q2 achieved positive growth and grew by 0.4 percent year on year. 1. The consumption margin improved, investments continued to increase, and imports and exports recorded rapid growth The income of residents grew steadily, and the improved pandemic situation promoted the recovery of consumption. In H1, China’s per capita disposable income reached RMB18463, increasing by 4.7 percent year on year in nominal terms, or 3.0 percent in real terms. The income growth of rural residents outpaced that of urban residents, and the structure of income distribution continuously improved. According to the Urban Depositors’ Survey conducted by the PBC in Q2, 23.8 percent of residents were inclined to “consume more,” up 0.1 percentage points from Q1. In H1, total retail sales of consumer goods decreased by 0.7 percent year on year, mainly due to the 11.1 percent year-on-year decline in April that was affected by the pandemic. The decline narrowed to 6.7 percent year on year in May and the year-on-year growth rate in June changed from negative to positive, which was 3.1 percent year on year. Investments continued to increase, buttressing the steady growth of the economy. In H1, total fixed-asset investments throughout China (excluding those by rural households) increased by 6.1 percent year on year. In terms of sectors, investments in manufacturing increased by 10.4 percent, 4.3 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in infrastructure increased by 7.1 percent, 1.0 percentage point higher than the growth of total investments. Investments in real estate decreased by 5.4 percent. Investments in the high-tech industry saw sound growth and grew by 20.2 percent year on year, 14.1 percentage points higher than the growth of total investments. Social investments grew rapidly, with a growth rate of 14.9 percent year on year in H1. Specifically, investments in health and education grew by 34.5 percent and 10.0 percent year on year, respectively. Imports and exports recorded rapid growth. In H1, imports and exports of goods grew by 9.4 percent year on year. Specifically, exports grew by 13.2 percent year on year and imports grew by 4.8 percent year on year, with the trade surplus in goods posting RMB2.4812 trillion. The trade structure continued to improve, with the share ofimports and exports under general trade increasing by 2.1 percentage points year on year and the share of private enterprises increasing by 1.9 percentage points year on year. Our trading partners are becoming more diversified. Imports and exports to the countries along the Belt and Road and to the RCEP (Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership) trading partners grew by 17.8 percent and 5.6 percent, respectively. Foreign direct investments (FDI) continued to gather in the high-tech industries. In H1, actually utilized FDI increased by 17.4 percent year on year to RMB723.31 billion (equivalent to USD112.35 billion, growing by 21.8 percent year on year, excluding investments in banking, securities, and the insurance industry). In terms of sectors, FDI in the high-tech industry and the services industry grew rapidly. In H1, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech industry grew by 33.6 percent year on year. Specifically, actually utilized FDI in the high-tech services industry grew by 34.4 percent year on year and actually utilized FDI in the high-tech manufacturing industry grew by 31.1 percent year on year. Actually utilized FDI in the services industry grew by 9.2 percent year on year. 2. Agricultural production was generally stable, industrial production grew rapidly, and the service industry continued to recover In H1, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries in the national economy grew by 5.0 percent, 3.2 percent, and 1.8 percent year on year, respectively. In Q2, the value-added of the primary, secondary, and tertiary industries grew by 4.4 percent, 0.9 percent, and -0.4 percent year on year, respectively. China saw another bumper grain harvest this summer, and animal husbandry grew steadily. The output of summer grains totaled 147.39 million tons, up 1.434 million tons from 2021, increasing by 1.0 percent year on year. The sowing area of autumn grains increased steadily. In H1, the output of pork, beef, lamb, and poultry grew by 5.3 percent year on year, and the output of pork specifically grew by 8.2 percent year on year. Production expectations of farmers improved gradually and hogs in stock increased quarter on quarter. At end-June, the number of hogs in stock totaled 430.57 million, up 1.9 percent from Q1. Industrial production recovered steadily. In H1, the value-added of Industrial Enterprises Above a Designated Size (IEDS) increased by 3.4 percent year on year. The leading role of new driving forces was enhanced. In H1, the value-added of the high-tech manufacturing sector increased by 9.6 percent, which was 6.2 percentage points higher than that of the IEDS. Recovery of the industrial chain and the supply chain was accelerated. The value-added of the automobile manufacturing sector increased significantly by 16.2 percent year on year in June. The profits of industrialenterprises recovered quickly. Total profits of the IEDS decreased by 6.5 percent year on year in May and increased by 0.8 percent year on year in June, changing from a decline to an increase. Among the 41 major industrial categories, 21 industries saw year-on-year profit growth, and the number of industries seeing growth accounted for 51.2 percent of all 41 industries. Growth in the services industry recovered gradually. In H1, the value-added of the services industry grew by 1.8 percent year on year. The Index of Service Production (ISP) decreased by 6.1 percent and 5.1 percent year on year in April and May, respectively, and the year-on-year growth rate turned positive and registered 1.3 percent in June. The new business forms of the services industry grew rapidly. In H1, online retail sales of commodities increased by 5.6 percent year on year, with the share of total retail sales of social consumer goods increasing by 2.2 percentage points year on year. Expectations of enterprises improved. In June, the Business Activities Index for the services industry reached 54.3 percent; specifically, the Business Activities Index of retail sales, railway transport, air transport, postal services, monetary and financial services, and capital market services were all within a prosperous range above 55 percent. 3. Consumer prices increased moderately, and the growth of producer prices continued to decelerate Consumer prices increased moderately. In H1, the CPI increased by 1.7 percent year on year, an acceleration of 0.6 percentage points from Q1. Specifically, the CPI in April, May, and June increased by 2.1 percent, 2.1 percent, and 2.5 percent year on year, respectively, and the core CPI (food and energy excluded) increased by 1 percent year on year. Driven by the increase in international energy prices, the increases in prices of domestic gasoline and diesel accelerated by 3.6 percentage points and 3.8 percentage points from Q1, respectively. With the start of a new Hog Circle, pork prices have tended to rise since late April. The growth of producer prices continued to decelerate. In H1, the Producer Price Index (PPI) increased by 7.7 percent year on year, a deceleration of 1 percentage point from Q1. Due to the influence of enhanced policies to ensure supplies and stabilize prices and the base effect, the year-on-year growth of the PPI continued to decelerate from 9.1 percent in January to 6.1 percent in June. In H1, the Purchasing Price Index for Industrial Products (PPIRM) increased by 10.4 percent year on year, a deceleration of 0.9 percentage points from Q1. The Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI) monitored by the PBC posted a cumulative year-on-year increase of 5.9 percent, 0.3 percentage points lower than that in Q1.Box 4 Annual Price Target Still Achievable, with Vigilance against Structural Inflation Pressures Elevated global inflation has recently been persistent, with the major developed economies in particular facing high inflation pressures that have been unprecedented for decades. In June, the CPI in the US climbed 9.1 percent from the previous year, setting a 40-year record high, and the HICP in the euro area surged 8.6 percent from the previous year, the highest since data have become available. Macro policies were caught between maintaining stable growth and countering inflation. This predicament was closely related to the actions taken by the central banks in the developed economies whereby they previously misjudged inflation developments and their policy adjustments fell behind market curves, which also offered inspiration and references for China’s macro management. It should be noted that preserving currency stability is the top priority of the central bank and maintaining stable inflation both underpins a stable macro economy and promotes sustained and steady economic growth. At any time, the central bank should be highly concerned about marginal changes in price trends, make broad-based considerations, analyze and judge future inflation developments objectively, and be ready for all sorts of policy-arrangement possibilities. On the one hand, in terms of economic fundamentals, China has favorable conditions to keep prices generally stable. China’s inflation trends have generally been moderate and stable over the previous months. Compared with the same period of the last year, the cumulative increase in the CPI from January to June registered 1.7 percent, and growth of the PPI eased every month. Domestic prices have remained stable amid unusually high worldwide inflation. It is expected that this year’s price increases will remain within a reasonable range, achieving the annual target of an average CPI increase of about 3 percent. This achievement does not come easily. Under the unified arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council to keep supply and prices of grains and energy stable, domestic prices were effectively shielded from the pass-through shocks of the global price hikes of major commodities and grains, and we refrained from adopting a deluge of strong stimulus policies and providing an excessive money supply, thus laying a solid foundation for price stability. Fundamentally, China is a major producer, its monetary policy remains sound and prudent, its aggregate supply and demand is broadly balanced, and it enjoys high grain self-sufficiency, with another bumper summer harvest and a record high level of grain output. In addition, domestic prices of coal and clean energies correlate weakly with international markets, domestic industrial and supply chains function smoothly, and household inflation expectations remain stable. Healthy, virtuous, and resilient economic fundamentals are helpful for price increases to broadly remain within a reasonable range over the medium and long term. On the other hand, we should be mindful that structural inflation pressures maygo up, imported inflationary pressures still exist, and a possible resurgence of price hikes driven by the interlacing of various factors are not problems we should take lightly. Externally, dividends, such as globalization and sufficient labor supply, that played important roles in stemming global inflation over the past two decades have been reversed amid higher costs of the transitions to cleaner, greener energy and industrial chain restructuring, thus pivotal global inflation picked up notably. Unexpected negative factors, such as renewed COVID-19 outbreaks, unusual climate changes, and geopolitical conflicts, may also intensify the uncertainties of supply and demand disruptions and price fluctuations, with the external environment witnessing fundamental changes. Domestically, a combination of various factors may fuel the temporary pick-up of a pivotal inflation rate. First, future consumption recovery following successful COVID-19 containment may drive a faster pass-through of previous PPI increases to CPI. Over the first six months, among the categories of the PPI basket, increases in production materials began falling from 11.8 percent to 7.5 percent in June, while living materials began growing from 0.8 percent to 1.7 percent, an evident pass-through to downstream industries. This growth was mainly fueled by the recovery of consumption demand, and higher total factor productivity can only partially offset inflation pressures. In practice, the most recent round of accelerated CPI pick-up in the US started after March 2021 when consumption demand recovered at a faster pace. Second, the CPI basket in China is more dependent on food, pork prices in particular. A new round of a “pork cycle” has already started, which may fuel higher food categories in the CPI basket. China has experienced roughly four rounds of a “pork cycle” since 2006, with each round lasting about four years and the first 1.5 to 2 years seeing price increases. Domestic pork prices dropped to the weak levels of the current stage in April, when about four years had passed since the previous cycle had started in around May 2018. Pork prices edged up in late April, and its price increases accelerated in the second half of June, with the slope of the upward curve steepening. Average wholesale prices soared more than 40 percent over the month from June 16 to July 15, indicating the beginning of another round of a “pork cycle.” Comparatively, due to our generally sufficient hog supply in the current stage, this round of pork price increases is likely to be more moderate than that during the swine fever period in 2019. But the price increases have also had upward effects on the CPI. Third, China’s dependence on imported oil, gas, and other energy resources is relatively high, and the soaring costs of imported energy have finally resulted in broader-based product price increases from domestic transport and travel for end-users. Brent crude-oil futures fluctuated between high absolute levels of 90 to 115 dollars per barrel since the second half of 2022, and from January to July the average price gains registered over 50 percent on a yearly basis. Affected by this, the average price of No. 92 gasoline in the first seven months grew 25.3 percent from the previous year, and the transportation and communication category in the CPI basket added 6.3 percent from the previous year, 4.5 percentage points higher than the overall CPI increase, thus pointing to the ongoing imported inflationary pressures. On balance, China’s pivotal CPI in the second half of the year is expected to move upward compared with the rate of 1.7 percent in the first half of the year, and theincrease in certain months may temporarily exceed 3 percent, as structural inflationary pressures grow. For the next stage, we will continue to pursue sound and prudent monetary policies, refrain from adopting a deluge of strong stimulus policies and providing an excessive money supply, and take a holistic approach to maintain stable growth, stable employment, and stable prices. On the one hand, we will make continuous efforts to lay solid foundations for a favorable environment whereby domestic grain production increases, while maintaining stability and smooth energy market functions, closely monitoring inflation developments both at home and abroad, and responding to them properly; On the other hand, we will continue to maintain a proper and adequate level of liquidity supply, ramp up support to the real economy, see that increases in money supply and aggregate financing are proper, and strive for the best possible economic development outcomes in 2022. 4. Fiscal revenue stabilized and rebounded, and the effects of support for stabilizing the economy and ensuring the people’s livelihood have emerged In H1, revenue in the national general public budget posted RMB10.5 trillion, increasing by 3.3 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), and decreasing by 10.2 percent year on year (calculated on a natural basis). Specifically, central and local fiscal revenue grew by 1.7 percent and 4.7 percent year on year (VAT credit refund excluded), respectively, and decreased by 12.7 percent and 7.9 percent (calculated on a natural basis), respectively. Tax revenue posted RMB8.6 trillion, increasing by 0.9 percent (VAT credit refund excluded). In H1, expenditures in the national general budget posted RMB12.9 trillion, increasing by 5.9 percent and accelerating by 1.4 percentage points from the same period of the previous year. In terms of the structure of expenditures, expenditures related to science and technology, transportation, and agriculture/forestry/water resource projects grew quickly, registering year-on-year growth of 17.3 percent, 12 percent, and 11 percent, respectively. 5. The employment situation improved slightly The surveyed urban unemployment rate fell. In H1, 6.54 million people were newly employed, and the surveyed unemployment rate averaged 5.7 percent. Specifically, the surveyed unemployment rate in April was 6.1 percent, and it was reduced to 5.9 percent and 5.5 percent in May and June, respectively. In June, the surveyed urban unemployment rate in thirty-one major cities was 5.8 percent, decreasing by 1.1 percentage points month on month. In June, the average weekly working hours of employees in enterprises were 47.7 hours, 0.5 hours more than in May. 6. The balance of payments and the external debt A basic equilibrium was maintained in China’s balance of payments. According topreliminary statistics, in H1 2022 China’s current account surplus registered USD169.1 billion, accounting for 1.9 percent of GDP, continuously staying within a reasonable range. Specifically, according to the balance of payments statistics, trade in goods recorded a surplus of USD320.7 billion, an increase of 36 percent year on year. The growth rate reached a new high. Trade in services recorded a deficit of USD37.8 billion, down 30 percent year on year. A basic equilibrium was maintained in cross-border capital flows. Specifically, direct investments recorded a surplus of USD74.9 billion. At end-June 2022, foreign exchange reserves registered USD3.0713 trillion, down USD178.9 billion from that at end-2021, mainly due to the increase in the US dollar index and the decline in the prices of financial assets in the major countries. By the end of March, the balance in the all-system foreign debt (denominated in both domestic and foreign currencies) posted USD2.7102 trillion, and medium- and long-term foreign debt accounted for 47 percent of all foreign debt. 7. Analysis by sector 7.1 The real estate sector In June 2022, among seventy medium and large-sized cities nationwide, newly built and second-hand residential housing prices decreased by 1.3 percent and 2.7 percent year on year, respectively. In H1 2022, the total floor area of sold units decreased by 22.2 percent year on year. Housing sales decreased by 28.9 percent year on year. Investments in real estate development fell by 5.4 percent year on year. Specifically, investments in residential housing development fell by 4.5 percent year on year.At end-June 2022, outstanding real estate loans by major financial institutions (including foreign-funded financial institutions) grew by 4.2 percent year on year to RMB53.1 trillion. Specifically, outstanding individual housing loans grew by 6.2percent year on year to RMB38.9 trillion. Outstanding housing development loans dropped by 1.4 percent year on year to RMB9.4 trillion. 7.2 The electronic information industry The electronic information industry is a strategic, fundamental, and leading pillar of the national economy, covering such areas as electronic information manufacturing and software and information technology services. In H1 2022, faced with multiple challenges brought about by factors including the complicated and serious international situation and the sporadic COVID-19 outbreaks at home, China’s electronic information industry demonstrated strong resilience with faster development in new driving forces. The growth rate of production picked up at a quicker pace, as manifested by the 10.2 percent year-on-year growth of the added value of electronic information manufacturing above a designated size in H1 2022, which is 6.8 percentage points higher than the growth of total added value of industries above a designated size. Investment in the industry kept ahead, as shown in the 19.9 percent year-on-year growth of fixed asset investments in electronic information manufacturing above a designated size in H1 2022, which is 9.5 percentage points higher than the overall investment in manufacturing. However, we must remain aware that the electronic information industry still faces many challenges, such as threats to the safety of industrial and supply chains, intensified competition, and the relocation of the industry abroad. First, it is urgent that we enhance the stability of industrial and supply chains. Electronic information is a typical global and technology-intensive industry. China’s weaker position in the global value chain and weak links in areas such as high-end chips and basic materials result in the problem of being “strangled.” Second, the transformation and upgrading of the industry is slow and the efficiency of the industry needs to be improved. In H1 2022, the operating revenue of electronic information manufacturing above a designated size grew by 7.7 percent year on year, while total profits shrank by 6.6 percent, with the operating profit margin posting 1.9 percentage points 1 lower than the average level of all industries. Third, the relocation of the industry abroad has accelerated. The sporadic outbreaks of COVID-19 at home, coupled with the bottleneck of international logistics and intensified geopolitical tensions, has brought new challenges to the global electronic information industrial chain in terms of its division of labor and layout. China has witnessed an accelerated relocation of such industry abroad, which is inevitable for the transformation and upgrading of its industrial structure as it is an objective law in global industrial relocation and factor endowment change for low value-added industrial chains to relocate to low-cost regions.Moving forward, the innovation-driven strategy will be continued to better safeguard industrial and supply chains, so as to ensure stable operation of the electronic information industry. First, research platforms for fundamental innovation will be enhanced at the national level, so as to take a long-term view in planning fundamental research, quicken the pace of independent innovation, and strengthen the foundation for the industry’s development. Second, more efforts will be made to build, improve, and upgrade the supply chain system, in order to create a gathering effect and a chain effect around the needs of leading and platform companies for production and supplementary services. Third, the opening-up will continue unswervingly to create new dynamics for international science and technology communications and cooperation, improve the image and influence of China’s electronic information industry, and relieve the stresses imposed by the relocation of industrial chains abroad. Part 5. Monetary Policy Outlook I. Outlook for the Chinese economy In Q2, the Chinese economy achieved positive growth under heavy pressures. In H1 2022, China’s GDP grew by 2.5 percent year on year. From March to April, downward pressures on the Chinese economy increased, due to internal and external factors exceeding expectations. From May to June, as positive results were achieved in prevention and control of COVID-19, relevant authorities accelerated implementation of a package of policy measures rolled out by the State Council to stabilize the economy, and ramped up efforts to implement fiscal, monetary, and industrial policies. The efforts stabilized the fundamentals of economic and social development to the greatest extent possible. In Q2, GDP registered year-on-year growth of 0.4 percent, and overall economic performance witnessed a stable recovery. Agricultural production was favorable and summer grain production saw a bumper harvest. Industrial production was in a steady recovery, and logistics and transportation gradually became smooth. The issuance and use of special local government bonds accelerated, and investment in infrastructure was speeded up. The momentum for transformation and upgrading continued. In H1 2022, the proportion of the value-added of the manufacturing sector in GDP was 0.7 percentage points higher than that in H1 2021, and the driving force of some key industries such as automobiles and electronics was enhanced. Employment and the people’s livelihood were guaranteed, and the urban surveyed unemployment rate declined for two consecutive months in May and June after a temporary rise. Green transformation was continuously promoted, and the proportion of clean energy consumption increased steadily. Imports and exports grew rapidly. An equilibrium was maintained in thebalance of payments, and foreign exchange reserves remained stable above USD3 trillion. At present, globally, with slower economic growth, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical tensions, the external environment has become more severe and complicated, while domestically, the foundation for economic recovery has yet to be strengthened. On the one hand, the pre-pandemic situation of “low inflation, low interest rates, low growth, and high debt” in the global economy is undergoing a fundamental transformation. In particular, high inflation is becoming the biggest challenge facing most economies. To control high inflation, the major developed economies have accelerated tightening of monetary policy, and the spillover effects on the emerging economies through foreign trade and investment, exchange rate fluctuations, and financial markets have increased significantly. Global economic growth is slowing down and the risks of a hard landing faced by some economies have increased. On the other hand, the recovery of domestic consumption is facing challenges, such as sluggish residential income growth, impaired balance sheets, and limited consumption scenarios, and there are still some difficulties and obstacles in actively expanding effective investment. The foundation for the recovery of the service sector is still not solid, young people face great employment pressures, and hard work is still needed to stabilize the economy. However, it should be noted that the fundamentals for China’s sound economic growth over the long run remain unchanged. The economy remains highly resilient, and there are abundant macro policy adjustment tools and favorable conditions for promoting high-quality economic development. We should maintain strategic focus, comprehensively implement the requirements for “preventing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and ensuring safe development,” coordinate pandemic containment and socio-economic development, ensure that a package of policy measures to stabilize the economy will deliver results, and stand firm in contributing to the stability of the national economy. Prices will remain generally stable throughout the year, but we should be alert to structural inflationary pressures. In Q2, pork prices bottomed out and the price of production materials fluctuated downwards. In H1 2022, the CPI increased by 1.7 percent year on year. Specifically, the CPI rose by 2.5 percent year on year in June. The PPI increased by 7.7 percent year on year in H1 2022. Specifically, the PPI rose by 6.1 percent year on year in June. In general, the Chinese economy is gradually recovering with a basically stable supply-demand relationship and moderate monetary conditions. Under the favorable conditions of stable and increased grain output and the smooth functioning of energy markets, it is expected that price hikes will remain within a reasonable range, the expected target of an annual average CPI growth of around 3 percent will be achieved, and PPI growth will continue its downward trend throughout the year. Going forward, as consumer demand recovers and transmission of the PPI to the CPI lags, a new cycle of pork price hike begins, and energy and rawmaterial costs are still at a high level, domestic structural inflationary pressures may increase, and imported inflationary pressures will still exist. It is expected that the growth of CPI will accelerate slightly in H2 2022, the CPI pivot will rise compared with that in H1 2022, and its growth in some months may temporarily exceed 3 percent. We should keep a close eye on price movements, strengthen monitoring and analysis, and be alert to any rebound of inflationary pressures. II. Outlook for monetary policy in the next stage In the next stage, under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will follow the guidelines of the 19th CPC National Congress, the plenary sessions of the 19th CPC Central Committee, and the Central Economic Work Conference, as well as the requirements set forth in the Report on the Work of the Government. Following the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, it will pursue progress while ensuring stability and it will take stability as its top priority. Applying the new development philosophy fully, faithfully, and comprehensively, it will speed up the building of a new development paradigm. It will deepen the supply-side structural reform, develop a modern central banking system, and improve the framework for a modern monetary policy. In addition, the PBC will ensure solid implementation of policies and measures to consolidate the economic rebound. It will work to stabilize employment and prices and it will give effective investment a key role so as to keep the economic indicators within a reasonable range. It will strive for the best possible outcome and do its part to set the stage for the upcoming 20th CPC National Congress. The PBC will strengthen implementation of the sound monetary policy and give play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure. It will take proactive measures to boost confidence. With proper intertemporal adjustments, it will balance short-term and long-term perspectives, economic growth and price stability, as well as internal and external equilibria. It will resolutely refrain from launching a deluge of strong stimulus policies and there will be no excessive money supply. With these efforts, it will provide stronger and higher-quality support for the real economy. While keeping liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, the PBC will encourage greater credit support for businesses. With policy-based and developmental financial instruments in place, key support will be directed toward infrastructure construction. Meanwhile, the PBC will maintain reasonable growth of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE). The aim is to achieve the best possible economic performance. Keeping a close watch on inflationary situations at home and abroad, the PBC will work to consolidate favorable conditions for stable and growing grain production and for smoothfunctioning of the energy market at home. With proper preparations and management, it will keep prices basically stable. Structural monetary policy tools will play a supportive role so that more support will be provided for inclusive MSB loans and for stable employment in micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises. The PBC will make good use of the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF) as well as central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use, for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for transportation and logistics. More financial resources will be channeled to key areas, weak links, as well as to those businesses and industries that have been hard hit by COVID-19, and new economic growth points will be cultivated. The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and will optimize the central bank policy rate system. While enhancing regulation over deposit rates, it will ensure that the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates will play an important role and will contribute to stabilizing the liability costs for banks. The overall financing costs for businesses are expected to drop, with the LPR reform continuing to unleash its potential and playing a guiding role. The PBC will pay close attention to economic developments in the developed economies as well as to the spillover effects of their monetary policy shifts, and it will focus on domestic issues while properly balancing internal and external equilibria. Pursuing a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, the PBC will maintain bottom-line thinking and strengthen macro-prudential management for cross-border capital flows so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Following market principles and the rule of law, it will coordinate efforts for economic development and risk prevention, keep the financial system generally stable, and firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur. First, the PBC will maintain stable and appropriate growth in money and credit. By using a mix of monetary policy tools, it will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and maintain reasonable growth in money supply and the AFRE, striving to achieve the best possible economic performance. Closely following the development of a number of uncertainties at home and abroad, it will conduct in-depth analyses of liquidity supply and demand in the banking system to improve the foresightedness, flexibility, and effectiveness of its operations. It will stabilize market expectations while properly balancing internal and external equilibria. Moreover, the PBC will improve the mechanism for money supply management, continue to ease liquidity, capital, and interest rate constraints on bank credit supply, and guide financial institutions to step up credit support for the real economy in line with market-oriented and prudential management principles. Development and policy banks will be guided to put into use the newly increased RMB800 billion quota of credit and the newly launched financial instruments worth RMB300 billion in order togive strong support to infrastructure projects. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for sustainable capital replenishment by replenishing capital for commercial banks through multiple channels and ramping up support for small and medium-sized banks in their issuance of perpetual bonds and other capital replenishment instruments, thereby improving the capacity of banks to serve the real economy and to forestall and defuse financial risks. Second, the PBC will use structural monetary policy tools in a focused, reasonable, appropriate, and flexible manner in order to prioritize financial support for key fields and weak links. It will keep central bank lending and discount policies stable to carry on inclusive and sustained funding support for agro-related businesses, MSBs, and private businesses. It will intensify financial support for MSBs and push for better implementation of the inclusive MSB lending facility so that it can play a bigger role in stabilizing businesses and securing employment. At the same time, the PBC will put into operation the CERF and the special central bank lending for clean and efficient coal use. It will encourage eligible financial institutions to lend at preferential interest rates to key projects that significantly reduce carbon emissions, and it will guide financial institutions to support green and low-carbon development based on market principles. Moreover, the PBC will support clean and efficient use of coal and coal-fired power. It will promote the transition to a green and low-carbon economy on the basis of the security of energy supply so as to help achieve the goals of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality with scientific and well-ordered steps. The PBC will also pick up pace in implementing the special central bank lending for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for transportation and logistics. These efforts are aimed at encouraging financial institutions to provide funding support for such fields in line with market principles and leveraging the role of structural monetary policy tools in providing targeted liquidity and positive incentives. Third, the PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy. More work will be done to concretely implement the financial policies already introduced. The PBC will make efforts to implement the package of policy measures to stabilize the economy; it will encourage the deferral of interest and principal payments for loans issued to MSMEs, self-employed traders, and cargo drivers; it will continue pushing financial institutions to implement the 23 measures providing financial support for COVID-19 control as well as economic and social development and the policies supporting the recovery of the hard-hit industries in the services sector; and it will improve and facilitate the access of MSMEs to financing. Financial institutions will be guided to accelerate their implementation of the Notice on Promoting the Establishment of Long-Term Mechanisms for Boosting Financial Sector’s Confidence, Willingness, Capability, andExpertise in Lending to Micro and Small Businesses so that they will be more willing and able to provide services for MSBs and will do it more sustainably. The PBC will continue to assess the effectiveness of the MSB credit policy orientation and enhance the application of the assessment results. Focusing on the priorities for rural revitalization, it will guide financial institutions to optimize resource allocations, promote innovations of financial products and services, and effectively ramp up financial support for the agricultural sector, rural areas, and farmers. The newly launched policy-based and developmental financial instruments worth RMB300 billion will be properly used in accordance with the laws and regulations, while the newly increased RMB800 billion quota of credit for development and policy banks will be put into use in a timely manner. At the same time, commercial banks and social resources will be guided to provide follow-up funding support. With these efforts, infrastructure development and other key projects are expected to deliver concrete progress soon to play a positive role in stabilizing investment. Firmly adhering to the principle that housing is for living in, not for speculation, and that the real estate market shall not be used to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy, the PBC will remain committed to keeping land prices, housing prices, and expectations stable. It will adopt city-specific measures and use the policy toolkit fully and effectively to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions. Meanwhile, it will prudently implement the regulations on prudential management of real estate finance and promote the healthy development of the real estate market to foster a virtuous circle. Fourth, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented interest rate and exchange rate reforms, and it will focus on domestic conditions while balancing internal and external equilibria. It will continue to improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and the central bank policy rate system. It will strengthen the regulation of deposit rates, put in place a mechanism for market-oriented deposit rate adjustments, and give full play to the self-regulatory mechanism for interest rate pricing to stabilize bank liability costs. Moreover, it will tap into the LPR reform and leverage the guiding role of the LPR to help bring down the overall financing costs for businesses. Taking steady steps to deepen the market-oriented exchange rate reform, the PBC will improve the managed floating exchange rate regime that is based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies, and it will enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate. It will strengthen expectation management and uphold bottom-line thinking while conducting monitoring and analysis of cross-border capital flows and stressing risk prevention. By doing so, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and give play to the role of the exchange rate in macroeconomic management and as an automatic stabilizer for the balance of payments. In addition, the PBC will continue to develop the foreign exchange market.Guiding both enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, it will offer guidance to financial institutions on providing services of exchange rate risk hedging for MSMEs with authentic needs based on a risk-neutral concept and on reducing the costs of risk hedging for enterprises, thereby maintaining the stable and sound development of the foreign exchange market. Meanwhile, the PBC will continue to advance RMB internationalization stably and prudently by further expanding use of the RMB in cross-border trade and investment, deepening international monetary cooperation, and promoting the sound and orderly development of offshore RMB markets. It will further liberalize and facilitate cross-border trade and investment and steadily move ahead with the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account. Fifth, the PBC will make continued efforts to deepen financial reform, and it will accelerate steps to advance financial market institutional building. The reform of development and policy financial institutions will move ahead, whereby they will be required to carry out category-based management of businesses and separate accounting, to strengthen capital constraints as well as risk management, to enhance incentives, and to fulfill their responsibilities so as to better play their roles in serving the real economy and supporting national strategies. The PBC will continue to build the legal system for the bond market and consolidate the legal basis for corporate credit bonds. It will also enhance the efficiency and interconnectivity of the multi-tiered bond market system and accelerate development of the commercial bank over-the-counter (OTC) bond market to improve bond market liquidity and to give rise to secondary market prices that are more consistent and effective. Moreover, the PBC will boost innovation in the bond market to intensify support for key fields and weak links, and it will improve the quality and efficiency of the services provided by the bond market to support the real economy. It will strengthen regulation of the bond market. Based on market principles and the rule of law, it will continue to adopt a zero-tolerance approach by stepping up efforts to crack down on illegal and irregular conduct in the bond market, and it will forestall and defuse bond market risks in a timely manner. At the same time, the PBC will remain firmly committed to advancing the opening-up of the bond market. Sixth, the PBC will improve the systems of financial risk prevention, early warning, resolution, and accountability, and it will build a long-term mechanism to forestall and defuse financial risks. Further steps will be taken to improve the macro-prudential policy framework as well as the capacity for systemic risk monitoring, assessment, and early warning and to enrich the macro-prudential policy tools. The PBC will improve the regulation of systemically important financial institutions. It will push systemically important banks to meet the additional regulatory requirements as scheduled. At the same time, it will pick up pace in pushing China’s global systemically important banks to establish and improve theirtotal loss-absorbing capacity so as to effectively enhance their risk prevention abilities. Coordinated efforts will be made to supervise and regulate financial holding companies. Work will move ahead steadily to implement the requirement that non-financial enterprises which fall under the prescribed circumstances should apply for the establishment of financial holding companies according to the law. And the PBC will continue to enhance the relevant rules and regulations to promote the sound, well-regulated, and sustainable development of financial holding companies. Furthermore, it will strengthen the financial legal system. With the drafting of the Law on Financial Stability and the establishment of the Financial Stability Fund, it will further streamline and improve the long-term mechanisms for financial risk prevention, mitigation, and resolution, aiming to put in place a routine mechanism for risk resolution that is based on market principles and the rule of law. The PBC will keep a close watch on risks in key fields and enhance the foresightedness, timeliness, and effectiveness of risk identification. Continuing to follow the principles of “maintaining overall stability, taking a coordinated approach, adopting differentiated measures, and defusing bombs with precision,” it will attach importance to preventing and defusing financial risks in order to reduce existing risks and strictly guard against emerging risks. Additionally, the PBC will further tap into the functions of deposit insurance for early corrections and risk resolution, leverage the role of risk-differentiated premiums as both incentives and restraints, and enhance the authority of early corrections. Continued efforts will be made to ensure that financial institutions and their shareholders, local governments, and financial regulators fulfill their respective responsibilities so as to join efforts in risk resolution and effectively implement the corresponding measures. The PBC will also improve the mechanism for financial risk accountability and hold accountable those responsible for major financial risks to effectively prevent moral hazards. It will firmly defend the bottom line whereby no systemic risks will occur.